I'm going to call the workshop to order, and I
will say, as this is a public proceeding,
unless the Board of Education specifically votes to go into
executive session, the... I have to take my glasses
off so I can see this close. The public has the right to hear everything that is
being said and to look at any exhibits that are being offered.
Please notify us by raising your hand if you're unable to see or hear,
or if you need an interpreter, as these
people just announced, you can just come down.
Somebody can come and sit with you and interpret as
we're going along. So please, if you need interpretation,
please come down and just speak with one of these
people.
So I'm going to ask the superintendent to
call the roll.
DeAngelis.
Here.
Dowling.
Left.
Feller.
Here.
Holman.
Richardson.
Here.
Rish.
Smith.
Here.
Thank you.
Done.
Thank you, everyone. First, I want to say that I made the
change from this meeting from the Red Bank Community Center back
to the lecture hall for two primary reasons.
First, Red Bank had limited seating, and as you could see, that wouldn't
work. The second was the audiovisual limitations.
We could not guarantee that a video would be without glitches,
so it made sense to move it back here.
Given that, we did offer transportation from home,
childcare availability in the library, and translation services,
an effort to make this as accessible as possible, and I hope that creates
a better situation for folks.
I also wanted to say that I hear that there's a lot of
emotion around these issues, and I'm hopeful that we can
just be kind and show grace, myself included.
Ultimately, the board needs to make a decision, and we're on a timeline,
so while it may feel fast, it's a timeline we must follow, and
Superintendent Entwistle will say more about this.
I have received some emails that have taken me to task on a number of
issues, so let me say that I do not intend
to pit one school population against another, to give
inaccurate information, or to create public shame.
In my public comments,
I did not call anyone a racist, although that has been said to me.
I spoke of my own white privilege with no apology since I did
nothing to earn it.
I am surely not without faults, and I make mistakes every day.
I went to dinner with friends on Friday night, and when I arrived, a friend asked,
"How are you doing?" And I burst into tears.
So I hadn't realized how much I was holding inside, but it all
came spilling out. I'm a firm believer in Miguel Ruiz's "The
Four Agreements,"
and the third agreement is don't take things
personally. But he is right when he says it's not easy.
I have been tired, overwhelmed, and sleepless, and I know other board members
feel the same.
We may have different views, but everyone has an opinion, which does not
mean we are biased. An opinion is a personal belief,
perspective, or judgment, while a bias is a prejudice
or unfair preference that slants information, often ignoring
the evidence. I believe everyone up here is trying hard,
doing the best that they can do, and we know you're doing the same.
I thank folks who have appreciated the work this board
does. That helps us move to the next email.
Most of us have answered you, attending to school business barring other
things.
Many have visited schools, spoken to parents and teachers, and talked
to other community members.
Since I don't know many of you, and in turn, you don't know me, it might be helpful
to hear some things. I grew up in Olney Beach.
We were the only Italian family at the time, and my parents were first-generation
immigrants, and English was not their first language.
They moved from Scollay Square, now Government Center, in Boston,
for the same reason many of you moved here,
to give us a better life.
I was the third of four children, and when I was about six, my dad ran for the
school board against a 20-year incumbent, and we went
door to door, each holding a sign. My sign said
"my," because the signs read, "Vote for
my dad."
And he won the election and served for multiple terms.
I was a difficult student, no surprise to anyone, questioning
authority and often challenging my teachers and my dad, which
was not easy.
My parents were not college-educated but had wisdom that I only
understood years later. I recently found a letter my dad wrote when
I was in my first job in Jefferson as a speech-language
pathologist, and it read, "Be sure you find out about the teachers union, and
make sure you join." How did he know this?
My mom and dad modeled political involvement and community engagement,
and during my teaching years, I served on the MEA Board of
Directors, I was chief negotiator, grievance chair, and finally, union
president right here in South Portland.
I served six years on the South Portland City Council, and I was
mayor in 2012. But none of my community involvement is who I
am. That's just what I do.Who I am is different.
I love art, and my walls are covered art by friends, former
students, and other artists. I was a drama queen in high school and college,
and I ran an elementary drama program, and later the drama club at South Portland
High School. I love to cook. I make a mean pizza.
I love to laugh, and I gather with friends whenever I can.
I was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1992, and my partner Joe
took me to every chemo and radiation treatment, never leaving me
alone.
When he was diagnosed with mesothelioma in 2019, I did
the same, only the outcome was different, and he died that
year, my best friend, and every day something reminds me of
him and reduces me to tears
every day.
He was a genius, an exquisite finish carpenter, an artist, and a
musician, and I'm grateful for every moment we had.
There is much more as there is about
each one of us up here.
I tell you this for no other reason other than to know something about
me beyond this dais.
Some emails said that I called some parents privileged, that I
am not thinking of the entire community, that I was unkind to
another board member, and please accept my apology,
Member Holman.
I am surely not perfect. I speak openly of my own privilege,
which looms over me. I don't see myself as a white
savior, but as someone with family and friends who have enriched
my life immensely. I'm asking that we all try to be kind to
each other, just kind. I do not think of myself as a
good person, and certainly not better than others.
Instead, I think of myself
as someone who's trying every day to be a good person, just
trying.
I try only to acknowledge my white privilege,
recognize it, and make different choices as a result.
None of that makes me better. It took me a long time to even see it.
I had a conversation recently with Member Davidson a couple of weeks
ago, and I am in awe of his awareness.
It far exceeds mine at twice his age.
I learn from him, and I'm grateful.
No one is doing this job because we want to hurt families or kids.
Not everyone even takes the small $1,000 stipend.
People do this job, run for public office, believing
that they have something to offer,
and wanting to make a difference and loving this community.
Please keep that in mind as no one is intending to support anything
but what that member believes is best for the community,
even though you may see it differently.
I have a saying that greets me every morning, "Make yourself useful doing
something hard with good people." And please know that everyone up here,
each of the nine of us, cares deeply and wants the very best,
and I'm blessed to be with all of you.
We can disagree, but underneath it all, we share a common goal,
and let's see if we can work from there. Thank you.
Can I address the board?
Please. Superintendent Entwistle.
This is an address to the board.
You've seen the detailed overview of the superintendent's budget and will soon
have an opportunity to dig into the deeper budget details.
It is, in brief or in detailed format, an overall
plan for spending, and it has, within certain
parameters, flexibility should the board wish to make some adjustments
down the road.
Please be thinking about this as the board moves to approve the overall
spending plan for the schools. The budget proposal
is further a path back to building
sustainability and financial health.
It's a big step, and unfortunately, it does come
at a cost to those impacted either by disruption
or by job loss.
And just one additional thought that I would like to share, if you will.
Perhaps it will be a reminder to the board.
It has to do with the rules around budget building and how those
rules, no matter how helpful and needed, can sometimes
create an awkwardness in the way information
flows out. They have us foreshadowing plan
changes prematurely and in public and cannot
be moved on without further meetings and discussions at a
later time, which do need to happen and will happen.
In summary, I'm guessing that it will all not surprise you to
hear as well that I do fully endorse this plan
and encourage you to do the same. Thanks.
Thank you, Superintendent Entwistle, and I'm going to
go to Dr. Prince,
or is Abigail going to start? Okay.
Abigail Ketchem is our finance director. Thank you, Abigail.
So I am Abigail Ketchem, finance director.
If you could go back to that first slide, I just want to remind
and point out that that budget detail, that is a link that's on our website.
So you can click there from wherever you're at and look at the line item budget.
Next slide.
So tonight, we are going to present our FY27 current budget
proposal.
We're going to talk both about personnel reductions and non-personnel
reductions.
We are proposing to close one elementary school, and we will
provide you with two different options for how that can look like,
both by either reconfiguring or redistricting.And we're also
going to take you through other reductions at the middle school,
at the high school, and in our operations.
Really, there are reductions everywhere throughout our budget.
At the end of this,
you all will have an opportunity to take some action if you choose to, if you feel
you have enough information to do so, and that will be regarding a school
closure, whether to reconfigure or redistrict along
with the school closure, and you'll have a decision available to you
for whether or not to accept this budget as a whole.
Next slide.
So we are in a
incredibly painful situation,
and
it's worth noting that alongside all of this pain,
we will still be a school district.
We will still teach students, and our mission is the same,
to teach our students. So we're not folding as a district.
We will be smaller, but we will move forward.
Our mission and our heart is for our students, and that's
the same no matter what the reductions are.
We are proposing losing 12% of our staff.
We're closing an elementary school, and we cannot deny
the pain that we're all in over this.
This is the last thing me and any other of our leadership wants to
be in. This is a very difficult time.
Alongside that, a few things just to point out about our budget.
I think the main thing is that we've taken a really close view,
especially on the non-personnel side of the budget.
The personnel side is fairly straightforward.
Everybody moves on to their next step, their next
increase. But on the non-personnel side, we've really focused on being
realistic.
We do have some under-budgeting in our current year, which has had an effect.
It's part of our spending freeze. It's part of our story.
And we've really focused on having as accurate and realistic
projections and increases for things like electricity, for example.
Next slide, please.
So I've been here about almost nine months,
and I hear a lot about
what happened here,
and I've gone through that same
spiral with what happened here, and I don't know
everything. But there are a few things that I think I do have
a take on it,
having looked in our books, having gone through fund balance year after year, and
just watching how the numbers fall.
So I do have some thoughts, and again, this is not excuses, it's
just
there are some causes that have led to the effects that we experience,
and it's worth just noting what those are.
I think a key one is just a misalignment between
enrollment and staffing and funding.
Broadly speaking, enrollment is declining.
That's not just South Portland, that's the whole state of Maine.
Their enrollment declines everywhere.
At the same time, staffing hasn't decreased.
We did have that brief surge. We had that influx of
new Mainers, and we staffed up accordingly.
Staff didn't reduce after that. We had a big boost in COVID
funding that helped elevate and boost staffing levels.
It helped us retain the staff we had.
Those funds concluded,
and our staffing level didn't come down.
And that's just a misalignment that
we were-- And then further boosted by utilizing our
savings as operational costs, which masked that
effect. So we didn't realize that we were headed towards this cliff
until here we are today.
So that was an important guardrail.
And you can blame decisions, but I think a key point
here is just we didn't have a minimum threshold policy on that
savings. If we had, the guardrail of
we need to keep this minimum,
staffing levels could have dropped more naturally,
and that would've been
far less painful
than where we are today.
And then I can't highlight the importance of leadership and stability.
We've had superintendent turnover.
I am the seventh finance director in six years, and
anywhere you find that kind of revolving door of
financial leadership, there's a degree of disarray
that is just an effect from that cause.
And there's no way
our books could have been in order.
There's no way we wouldn't have been able to better plan if there had been that
stability in leadership. So again, that's not an excuse,
that's just cause and effect, and it's worth noting because things like that
have a very real effect, and it shows up everywhere.
It shows up in operations. It shows up in audit findings.
It shows up in how we budget. It shows up in internal
discussions like, "Hey, do we need that?" Internally, externally,
it has an effect throughout an organization.
So again, that's not the whole story.
I can't know everything, but that's my take on things, and if
that's helpful at all,
there you have it, and I understand if it is not helpful.
But that is what I'm seeing so far.
Next slide, please.So here we are today.
Yeah, we're seeing continued declinement of enrollment.
Our staffing and funding, along with our fund balance, we're just at this
pivotal juncture that creates this kind of financial cliff where we find
ourselves quite stuck.
And I can't calculate our way out of this, but this is where we are.
And we are projecting a deficit for this fiscal year.
FY27, we're at a limit, but this year is potentially a deficit.
And we are reducing spending as much as possible.
We've got an interim superintendent.
We had new contracts finalized. There were a lot of unknowns there that now we do
know. So then, we weren't able to calculate everything that we might
have wanted to have calculated. And there's
me, the seventh in six years.
Overall, this budget is
a staggering, rather devastating
adjustment.
And
partially, we have to meet these tax limits, and also we have to move forward
sustainably.
I think we owe it to people to find a sustainable path.
Next slide, please.
So as we have our FY27 ahead of us, what
I'm really thinking about even more, in a way, is
FY28 and beyond.
So FY27, it does reset our financial path,
but it does not solve our core problems.
So we have to be really careful about how we think of things.
To give an analogy,
and there's always holes in analogies, and I get that.
But let's say you have a person who's in dire straits because they're mired in
credit card debt, right? Then now there's external factors.
There's things that's outside of their control, a job loss, a diagnosis.
There's things that they can't control.
And then there's also things they can control, like choices and how their
decisions are shorter term or longer term.
And FY27 is kind of like wiping out the balance, right?
That doesn't solve your core problems, right?
If the external factors are still there, if the internal choices are still
there, we could certainly find ourselves in this place again.
So with that said, this is really a beginning
path to how we can
lead financially in a way that is
sustainable. To move forward effectively, we have
to have a longer view of our decision-making.
We do need new policies, like a minimum threshold policy for savings.
We need some clear guidance on building up an emergency savings.
Again, we do need that.
And we have to have a continuous commitment to
adjust as
evidence evolves. If we get a new surge in enrollment again, then of course we have
to staff up. If enrollment declines more, then we have to staff down.
So we have to really adjust and be dynamic to
the situation at hand.
And when I think about the next fiscal year, we do have other challenges
ahead that we have to keep in mind.
And I bring this up as we think about what we might
want to do for this fiscal year.
A key point here is that our labor costs, when you include everything,
if all people stay in the exact same position,
our labor increases at a rate that's higher than 6%.
So if that's the majority of your budget, then it's mathematically
impossible not to have a problem, okay?
It just is. And again, I can't calculate our way out of that.
So that's something that we just have to think through as we move from any one
given year to the next given year.
Our utilities are increasing at high rates.
Electricity, there's a 13% yearly increase,
there's a 14%. Those are actuals.
So we can't really make up the high labor
increase with
trying to spend as little as we can on non-personnel costs, because those are
increasing as well.
We will have at least another 300,000 in debt service in FY28
this year. With the new athletic field, we have one interest payment, but next year
we'll have two interest payments and a principal payment.
So that adds. The Skillen Boiler, it's a bit of a
question mark, but it could result in new debt to ensure that that
facility remains online. And then declining enrollment,
just as that continues to incline, that does reduce non-local tax
revenue from the state of Maine.
So with all that said, we have to keep those things in mind as we consider our
current year's budget.
I do think that we
do have a reasonable path forward.
I do have
confidence in that.
I think with some multi-year financial planning, which is certainly in order,
I've already started that on this side, but we can certainly
build out more multi-year financial planning.
I think just a careful review of roles and position requirements with
natural attrition will probably be needed as we head from
FY27 to FY28 to pay for that other added
debt and other increases.
And just as a quick note with that, I feel that we owe it
to any new employee that we hire that we can afford you
for as long as you're doing well. And I think that we have to get to
that point. And I know that we can. And then, of
course, just a yearly review of all of our non-personnel costs, tech,
subscriptions, service contracts.
We're obviously really heavily scrutinizing, and we've reduced a lot this
year. That kind of an exercise that we've gone through internally
is an every year kind of thing that we should be
doing.Next slide.
So back to the budget at hand.
So what you're looking at is the overall cost centers for our budget, and you can
see it adds up to a total of 75,850
at the very bottom.
The first cost center, regular instruction, that's most of our regular teaching.
You'll see it's gone down a bit
from the last year. That's mostly representative of closing a school as well as
other reductions at the middle and high school.
Special educations, it's an increase.
Those needs are there. The other ones are kind of minor
ups and downs. I think we've just had reductions throughout
all areas of the budget. And then adult education, we're
keeping a small reduction there.
But again, the line item detail is available online.
Next slide, please.
Okay.
So the tax impact of the FY27 budget, we were given a
charge to have no more than 6%, and
that is what we are delivering on with this budget.
You can see our local tax proposed revenue. That's the 6%.
The non-tax revenue, you can see how that's gone negative
5%.
Largely, that's due to not having fund balance, because last year we had our
savings built in as revenue, and this year we don't.
Our total overall budget increase is 3.3%,
and that is the lowest that we've actually had in many
years.
What that means to the individual taxpayer,
it works out to about $257 additional
per year.
Next slide.
Where we're at in the timeline, we're right in the middle.
We're at the March 23rd workshop.
We are headed for the April 7th budget presentation to City
Council. Hence, our timeline is pretty tight at this point.
That's all I need to say on that one. You can do the next slide.
And you can, next slide.
Okay.
So again, we have
reductions throughout our budget. It's both personnel and non-personnel.
Next, I'm going to walk you briefly through the non-personnel reductions.
Next slide.
Okay.
So the way we built our budget, we started with a roll-forward budget,
which is just taking everybody's salaries, moving them forward a
year, and their increase.
And then after that, we include all department budget requests,
new capital needs, anything that we haven't
considered before, so then that adds to the budget.
And then from there, then we start whittling it down to something
that is manageable
in order to meet our tax increase
cap.
So
from that big budget, we were able to find 1.61 million
in reductions.
One key point here is that top-line nutrition transfer.
So this is an area of concern.
In FY26, we budgeted to transfer
202,000, but the real deficit was several hundred
thousand, so there was a mismatch there.
And what we're correcting for with this budget is a transfer that
is both more realistic, but also still requires
nutrition to reduce as a whole.
So it's more, but
when you look at what nutrition would likely spend next year, it would be
over a million in terms of a deficit that would be required for the
school fund to fund. And from there, we're reducing.
So nutrition will still run at a deficit, even with all of
its reductions,
but we will be better prepared to pay for a reduced version
of that.
With closing one school, we were able to find
about $378,000 in savings.
We didn't remove all possible costs.
We left about 20% of various
utilities, but not insurance,
just because we may keep the building short-term, so we don't need
to fully take care of the building and service it as if we had students there, but
we'll need some to appropriately mothball it
until we figure out
whether we can lease it or not.
So that is built in.
The original roll-forward plus all the other
department request budget had a $2,000 payment
to the city. Given that we are anticipating an
FY26 deficit, and because we have no fund balance, we would have
to,
by default, draw from the city, and so then we would have to pay that back.
We took that out with the idea that if that does come to fruition, we
would start that in FY28,
in particular because it takes six-plus months for a fiscal year to close, so
we
realized that we probably wouldn't have to make a payment then, but the next fiscal
year we would.
We
did a real comb through our software and hardware expenses and was able to
find 148,000 to remove from there.
Over time, you'll hear a little bit more about that when we get to the service
reductions, but we have
plans to reduce by at least 130,000.
There are a variety of stipends that we're reducing.
We have contingencies in place. We still have contingencies.
We will still plan to pay our legal bills and some business office
contingencies, but we reduced from
there.We're removing lunch aids.
We're removing a second lunch.
The second lunch,
we can talk more about that, but we will say that students do have other
opportunities to get free food, and so we would rely on things like
the Locker Project
in lieu of a second meal, which the state of Maine does not
pay for,
and financially has told us to cease and desist the
practice.
We're also reducing a little bit in vehicle supplies and parts.
We're hoping we'll be able to shave that off fairly easily.
And then,
with the school closure,
just by efficiencies, we can reduce some instructional and
guidance supplies.
There's a lot left. And then what is left, I just
divided with the remaining elementary schools.
So there's some efficiency there, but by and large
parts, we're going to have a similar number of students, so just other schools get
a little more.
And with that, I will
let my colleague take over.
Good evening. Excuse me. I'm Johanna Prince.
I'm the assistant superintendent of schools.
And I'm going to start us off on the elementary proposal and then be joined by
my colleague, Bethany Connelly. So if you'd go on to the next slide.
So the superintendent's budget that is in front of the board this
evening does have a change since we began the
process. When we began the process, we were
considering moving forward with expansion of locally funded
pre-kindergarten.
As we have heard feedback from the community and looked
at the balance of the initiatives,
we have since changed that. So the budget in front of you this
evening carries forward 64 seats for
pre-kindergarten that is through locally funded dollars.
However, through a couple other opportunities for expansion,
we do anticipate more seats for our four-year-olds next
year. We will be adding eight seats that are
funded by CDS, which is Child Development Services.
So those are not locally funded, but will provide services
for our students with special education needs.
In addition, we are expanding our partnership model of
pre-K delivery by adding a United Way
classroom, which would happen off-site.
And then we are in conversations with Head Start, which
would expand our seats by 16. That
would be offered through an in-kind donation of a classroom space, but it would
be funded through Head Start. So
despite not adding local dollars, we have increased
by 40 seats that we can offer to four-year-olds next
year. So that is a change since earlier.
If you would move on to the next slide.
So the superintendent's budget does include the recommendation to
close a school. We do not recommend
decommissioning the school. That would limit our
future use. We are recommending that we close it for
school programs. We can explore leasing the building for
up to four years prior to a decision to extend the
period or decommission. During that lease period,
we may generate revenue if we are able to find an
appropriate person to lease the building.
If we do not move forward with school closure, then we
would estimate that an additional 12 to 16 positions
from across the district would need to be eliminated to
create a balanced budget.
We've listened to the board and public throughout this process to understand
the criteria the community values.
And on the next slide.
Throughout the last four months, we have considered all five
buildings for potential closure.
We began with looking at the long-term facilities costs,
and Skillen, as we shared, has a long-term facilities need.
So that is where we began.
Then, through feedback, the remaining four schools were
considered.
Brown and Small were not identified for further
analysis because they are a larger capacity than
Dyer and Kayler, and closure would lead to more
portable use, which we heard from the community and the
board was a concern.
So we conducted an analysis of Kayler and Dyer,
and the recommendation in our proposal this evening is a closure of Kayler.
And on the next slide.
Two things on the next slide. Down at the bottom of the slide for anyone
who's following along, you are able to open the more
detailed analysis. But we went
back to our team to evaluate these two schools
across six domains with a series of
subcategories to help identify
which building to propose.
Our budget council, which includes directors and school principals,
and all of our elementary school principals, performed this
analysis. We performed it twice, and in both instances,
it led to the conclusion of Kayler school as
the proposed
site for closure.
The next slide, on slide 18, my colleague Bethany
Connelly... is going to present the two options
that we have in front of the board. The first option is
option A, which is a primary and intermediate model, and
option B is a full grade band model.
Important to note that overall staffing full-time
equivalent positions is the same in both, so there is not a
cost difference between the two models as we currently have
configured them.
Hi, I'm Bethany Connolly. I'm the principal at Skillen.
So as you can see, there are two models that we are
proposing. And both have been
discussed in
some way, shape, or form at previous meetings.
So option A is what some people
may
have heard as reconfiguration. So reconfiguring the grade
levels that are at each of the schools to have
pre-K, kindergarten, and first grade at two schools,
which would be our primary schools, Dyer and Small, and then
have two intermediate schools which would have grades two, three, and
four, and those would be Brown and Skillen.
In option B,
there is still a school closure,
but each of the four elementary schools all would
have kindergarten through fourth grade.
Brown and Small would have the pre-K programs.
Can you go to the next slide?
So in looking at these options,
this slide shows the capacity of each of
the schools,
and again, shows Kahler as being closed.
And then
under option A, where it says students, that's an
estimate of how many students we would
have in this configuration.
Option B
is the same thing,
but if the schools were K through four or
pre-K through four.
Whoops, can you go back one, George? Thank you.
So these are the current average class size ranges, and
anytime we work in averages, it's just a caution that it's
basically leveling things out as though everything is the same
in all grade levels and that there are equal amounts of children at each grade
level. There aren't. There are ebbs and flows.
Sometimes we have
bigger grade
levels, and other years, we might have smaller grade levels.
But for the sake of this slide, we looked at averages.
The blue section to the left are current class
sizes.
Our district policy
is in the gray at the top. So for 16, for pre-K, that's
actually set by the state.
In South Portland, we have set district policy that our K,
first, and second-grade classes are capped at 20,
and our third and fourth-grade classes are capped at 24.
That is still considerably lower than the state
class size ranges, but I think
anyone who's a teacher knows that there's a big difference between a class of
16 and a class of 24. So in looking
at the averages,
in both
options, class sizes increase.
And because we used averages, they increase equally across
the four schools.
That's something I think we would need to
dig a little further into and keep an eye on in terms
of
maintaining equitable experiences for our kids.
But it would
result in increased class sizes.
I think we can go to the next one.
So in the
reconfiguration, the primary and intermediate model,
those would be the number of sections at each school
for next year,
and the capacity at each school.
So when we look at option A,
for I think any
option that we explore has pros and cons,
opportunities and challenges. So
when we look at considering a reconfiguration where we have
pre-K to one schools and two to four schools,
there are more opportunities for grade level
collaboration. There's
absolutely more
efficiencies to how we allocate our human resources
if we are
in grade level spans.
So an example of that would be how we
allocate our multi-tiered system of support resources.
The developmentally specialized structures for early
childhood and upper elementary.
Right now, I think, in a
K four school,
you have staff that works across all grade levels K through four,
which when you're the person in charge of designing the master schedule, kind of
requires that your kindergarten schedule looks very similar to your
fourth-grade schedule because you have staff that teaches
across.In a grade-level
configuration,
if the school is all primary grades, I think there's
more opportunities to realize developmentally
appropriate programming,
looking at
maybe some multi-age
options, different things to enhance
programming in a way that's developmentally appropriate,
especially as we're trying to teach our youngest learners all of their
foundational skills.
However, there are also challenges with that, and
I think it takes a long time to build a school culture
and school identity. And one of the
very lovely things about South Portland is we have five excellent
elementary schools with five wonderful staffs,
and I think any person feels very strongly that
their school is a wonderful place to educate children.
I think that would continue with four schools.
I think there would be a period of
growth and challenge, but I think we are
in a period of challenge.
The time and the logistics required to make a
change of this scale for the fall of '26,
it's a concern.
One of the nice things about having a pre-K four or
K four school is there are role models for
younger students.
And
we, as a staff, we get to know a family
as their kids come in in kindergarten and keep them until fourth grade
and see babies being born and siblings and all of
those things.
And again, I
don't think we would lose that completely, but it would feel like absolutely a
change, and it's something that we've heard from the community that is a
concern.
Can you go to the next slide, please?
For the mixed grade model, which is
four schools, two pre-K to four, and two K
through four, this would be the breakdown of
classrooms,
the number of classrooms at each grade level.
I think, again, we're working with averages.
And so that
would need, I think, some refinement as we determined
exactly what would happen with the current Taylor
students who are redistricted
to other schools and
if there are students at the other schools who
also would need to be redistricted as a result, like a
ripple effect of doing that.
So, we have definitely heard concern
that we don't want too many transitions for our youngest
learners. So this model does minimize
that.
The previous model would have two transitions in the
elementary years as opposed to one.
Although
some pre-K students, they would attend pre-K in one,
so some of our youngest learners do currently
have two transitions.
This model allows for a broader age
range of students to stay together
and presents less change for families,
but not all families. There's still a large-scale change for
some families. I think it's
change for fewer families in this case.
Concerns and challenges.
This model does not address our
goal of having more heterogeneous schools
and classrooms. So I think one of the
positives that I may have
forgotten, because I think I ended up going a little bit out of order,
is that by doing grade span
reconfiguration, we can get closer to having
the demographics of each of our school more closely mirror the
demographics of our city. If we continue with
the K four or pre-K four, we are
continuing the model we currently have in which we
have vastly different student populations
demographically
at the four schools. And so this model
does make it more challenging to
get us closer to having schools that
represent the demographic of the whole city.
This also does not bring us
closer to the efficient allocation of resources.
So like I talked about with a pre-K one
and targeting the resources we need to support
foundational literacy instruction,
we could do that at two schools. In this model, we have to spread that
across all four schools. And that's just iterative for
all the different programs and resources that we have.
And then
also in this model, there is the potential that
we could
go back to having
very low class sizes in some grade levels at one school and higher
class sizes at the same grade level in another
school. And that'sSomething
that we tried to alleviate
through boundaries and configurations and looking at having lower class sizes
in the schools with the most diverse population
and the most students farthest from opportunity.
And this model does not allow us to do that,
or
we would have to look at it very carefully in order to do that.
I think this is you.
Okay.
All right.
So where that brings us to is the recommendation of the
leadership team.
And beginning on March 2nd, when we presented to the board,
our leadership team has been committed to the fact that
reconfiguration allows for the best outcomes for students
and for using our resources efficiently.
And we believe Option A and Option B
can both allow the district to accomplish this goal.
They can both happen, but they happen on two different
times.
Option A is a faster path towards the outcome.
Option B could be the plan for the fall of '26,
while the board and the community engages with
implementation for fall of '27. The board is not able
to take action on a future board's fiscal commitments,
but they can recommend moving
forward with a study.
In either option, the leadership team is committed to
partnering with our educators, families, and the
public to listen and communicate about the
changes. We know these both represent large
changes,
and we want to further say that in both models,
we anticipate movement of staff between buildings
as we plan for the next chapter in South Portland.
While we are closing one building in this model,
that is not the only staff that would be
impacted however we move forward.
We are a district, and we will need to think about how to have our
educators working in teams to support students, whether we go
with Option A or Option B.
So with that, I will move on to speaking about staffing
changes. And first,
wanting to give the board and the public an update on the
notification process to staff
who would be impacted by this budget moving forward.
And I want to start this with a really deep appreciation for
our association leaders.
They have showed deep knowledge, care, and offered
partnership to district leaders and administrators and have
undoubtedly made this process better because of that
commitment. So a hearty thank you to those leaders.
Association leaders have reviewed the impact lists, sought
clarity, and ensured that the contracts are upheld.
And just by way of timeline, on Sunday evening,
the 15th, there was a joint letter from our
four associations that was sent to all members to share that they'd
been consulted on the process.
On the 16th, the district shared the timeline for
notification, and on the 18th,
staff who were impacted by the budget proposal were notified.
On Thursday the 19th and Friday the 20th, all
impacted staff were offered conversations that we scheduled
ahead to also include association representation,
and staff were able to accept or decline the meetings
and/or representation.
Next slide.
Want to say again publicly to the board and to the
community, if the board moves forward with the superintendent's
budget proposal, then all staff impacted by
reductions have been notified, and no further
reductions are anticipated to be made.
If there are changes to the proposal, such as keeping five schools
open or shifting the distribution of reductions, then more
reductions and different reductions may be needed to meet the
budget constraints.
On slide 29, if you would move forward.
We began this budget season in December talking
about the changes in our enrollment and the changes in
staffing. What we have now added to Slide 29
to share is, again, if the board moves
forward with the superintendent's budget,
we've added what our
staff numbers would look like and our anticipated
enrollment for September of this year when we
begin a new contract year.
Oops.
Sorry. Really trying to be discreet.
If you would move on to the next slide.
So I'm just going to walk through the impacts to a few of our
associations, and then Dr. Entwistle will take over.
Our service association,
there are 13 position reductions.
Eight of those were a vacancy, and five employees
were notified that their position would
be eliminated. On the next
slideYou are able to see that breakdown across
the three groups.
And where it says the potential on recall list, all of our
associations have what is known as a recall list.
If staff have been reduced in force, then they
have the sort of first eligibility for any vacancy that
opens to be called back in and offered the job.
So in the current proposal, there would be five staff that would be
on the recall list, such that if there was a vacancy through a
retirement or resignation, that member would be offered
that position first if they meet the qualifications before an outside
hire.
If you would go forward, in the next group for
our support professionals,
there were 18 position reductions, but eight of them were
half-time, hence why the numbers are a little bit
different when you subtract from FY26 to
27.
And in that unit, there were eight vacancies or known
retirements. On the next slide,
you can see how that breaks down for the impacted
individuals.
And again,
the potential for on the recall list or if someone has already been offered
another vacant position.
As part of this budget, the district
would like to move forward with hiring ed tech
two and threes,
and discontinuing the use of ed tech ones as we believe
that provides us the most ability to meet student
needs. Those levels of ed tech certification, if
you're unaware, are relative to the number of credits in
college that an individual has, with the more credits
being ed tech two or ed tech three positions, and those have
more
ability to supervise students in different settings.
In addition, on slide 34, if you would move forward.
Lunch aides are not part of a bargaining unit currently.
We have had seven lunch aide positions.
These positions, for those of you that don't know, are two hours a day
on our 176 students' days.
Currently, across the district, there's an uneven
distribution of those positions.
And over the last four years,
these positions have been at about a 50% vacancy
rate. And the FY27 budget does not
include these positions,
as we had to focus our resources on
instructional outcomes.
On the next slide is the impacts to the teachers association with
the superintendent's budget,
and the reductions,
again, with
both the anticipated reductions and then vacancies and known retirement.
If you go on to the next slide.
So again, currently there are 11
members who, under this proposal,
have been offered a different position than
the one that they are in this year. And then there are 32
staff members that are currently on the recall list, meaning
they do not have a position in the FY27 budget,
but would be eligible for any vacancies
related to their certification area.
On slide 37,
we have listed out what the reductions in the
teachers unit are, and then in parentheses next to
each one of those, we have tried to indicate for the board and
public how many positions remain of
that type so that the board and the public can understand
the impact, not only across the unit, but the fact that this
impacts different content areas or different role types.
So,
I think that brings us to the end of that section, and I'll turn it back over to
Dr. Entwistle, who's going to talk about the next section.
Thank you, Jo.
I want to talk a little bit about our educational leaders in the roles of
directors and building administrators.
We hear from people often about the value of our instructional
roles, our teachers, our ed techs, our specialists, but
there seems to be less understanding about the value and the significant
value
contributed by the administrators and the directors.
I do think it's the job of the superintendent to not only
clearly articulate these roles, but also to share that publicly.
It's also the job of the superintendent to ensure the full utilization of
these roles in service to the needs of the
district's
students.
And
I've not escaped that by being interim, so it's a
responsibility that I feel I have as well.
We see here
the change forecasted in the current version
of the budget.
Out of 15 current directors, the director of curriculum
instruction and assessment position will be eliminated, and those
responsibilities will shift to a curriculum instruction
and
assessment team.
And in order for our diversity and equity efforts to have more
impact,
we are considering a move of the DEI director into a
specialist educator role, embedded with a
team of other specialty content
experts.Job
descriptions for all of our current positions are included
on this slide.
There's some that have left, that have already
been removed. But all of the other current
ones are there, and these slides can be found on the
opening page of the Budget section on
our website.
Let's see what that looks like.
Or not tonight.
Some information about special education.
Here's a regional special education comparison.
When comparing the number of students identified for special education,
out of the eight schools listed, you will see that we land
in the larger group of the five schools that have
populations of kids with IEPs of
20% or more.
In that group, we are right smack in the middle.
With a ratio of administrators to students
being 210 students per
administrator. Here you'll see our special education services,
as would be expected, given an identified
23% of total students being identified,
lands us unexpectedly between Gorham and
Westbrook.
Also a little unexpectedly, our ratio of
students-- Oops, what did I do?
There we go.
A little unexpectedly, our ratio of students
to special ed strategists or
coordinators
is the second highest and also at 210
students to each
strategist/coordinator.
As an aside, in providing some detail about the difference between
director and a strategist, this is the differentiation of
responsibilities.
And as you can see, it deals with the level of budget oversight,
the direct reports to that
person,
risk of error, accountability for outcomes,
teacher or administrator certification, and
contract.
And this is an update in terms of our Director
of Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment.
And Ellen Ferrick,
we're sad to say, has resigned effective June
30th. We do appreciate the work that she's done.
Ellen has just been with us this year.
And we want to take this change to redefine our
approach to how we do curriculum and instruction
and assessment, and use a new model, which is going to be
a curriculum council.
This is the proposed curriculum council.
The lead of the council would be the assistant superintendent,
and you can see the
members there,
who would have reporting to the assistant superintendent listed as
members.
A little more clarity on the
strategist jobs.
A special education instructional strategist is an existing
role. A new
multilingual strategist role is a re-envisioned
of the job of ESOL
coordinator, and one that will be supervised by the director of
multilingual programs.
It's not a new position. It's a
redesigned position.
Another new role of early childhood strategist will
support pre-K and K transitions,
and also CDS, Child Development Services,
and programs off-campus. This job
requires a special ed credential, one focusing on
early childhood,
and will duly report to both the
building administrator and to special
education.
Again, slide 44,
and as noted earlier, a change
being contemplated from DEI director moving
to coordinator or DEI strategist, and that's under
review.
Here's a new configuration in terms of administrative
roles
for elementary,
for middle school,
for pre-K,
an assistant principal for teaching and learning, which is actually pre-K
through eight
being reassigned,
and then the high school.
That brings us to middle and high
schoolAnd
there you are.
Here I am.
So fast. Rebecca.
Thank you. Good evening. My name is Rebecca Stern.
I'm the principal of the middle school, and I'm going to talk about, first,
some big picture shifts that are shared between the middle and high school, and
then specifically about middle school proposed changes.
So across grades five through 12, we have looked at teaching
reductions as well as programmatic changes.
It's important to note that the teaching reductions and
other staffing reductions are proportional to the size of the budget that the
middle and high school have. Our elementary schools,
because they are greater in number,
have a larger proportion of the budget than the middle and the high schools
do. So those reductions have been in proportion to
that budget, so it looks like fewer cuts.
It is proportional budgetarily speaking.
A shared teaching position that we have reduced is a
BCBA, a board-certified behavior analyst, which is
split between the high school and the middle school, 50/50.
We do have a shared ed tech position that is being reduced between
the middle and high school in this proposal, as well as anticipated
shifts in special education ed techs.
Those shifts are always made in the spring and summer based on student need, and
we anticipate with our incoming younger students that we will have more shifts to
the elementary school. We also have a shift in administration with the
curriculum council, a middle school assistant principal serving
pre-K through eight moving forward.
So a reduction of a .5 of an administrator at the middle school
level.
Next slide.
So specifically at the middle school,
we are proposing reductions in the following ways: four related
arts teachers, one ESOL teacher, teacher of our multilingual
learners, half of a BCBA position, half of the assistant
principal position, and then half of the percussion ed tech
and others move to the elementary level,
as I mentioned earlier. I'm going to talk specifically about the related
arts teachers as well as our ESOL teachers, since those
have yet to be explained.
So at the middle school, we care very deeply about
related arts and having students at this young age being really exposed to the
wide variety of creative endeavors that they may pursue
as adults. We are proposing the reduction,
however, of
four teachers from 20 to 16 related arts teachers.
Currently, those teachers teach four classes a day.
Moving forward, they would teach five classes a day.
They would still have more than the contractual amount of prep time that
is in the SPTA contract, and of course, the contractual
lunch that everybody gets of 20 minutes a day.
This choice is based on having the least amount of impact to student
course offerings. Currently, our students are able to take all
of the different related arts offerings, and they have two related arts periods a
day. Often the highlight for students, no offense to our literacy, math, and
science teachers, but RAs are pretty exciting.
This will not change that experience for students,
which we really value at the middle level.
It also means that students don't have to choose between band and chorus,
band, chorus, and a world language, which is often a choice that is made at
surrounding middle schools because of the bell schedule and because of staffing
levels.
So there are a couple of metrics that we want to look at in
this change. The ratio of related arts teachers to students
is still stolidly in the middle of the surrounding areas.
If we look at 10 surrounding middle schools, the ratio of related arts
teachers to students is either one teacher to 36 students, and then all the way up
to one teacher to 69 students.
South Portland Middle School would still be at 50 to one with this new
configuration in the middle.
Currently, we're at 41 to one, which is on the lower end.
And in addition, class sizes will remain similar because the same number of class
seats are available due to the increased number of sections.
So there is not a reduction in terms of the class seats that we will have available
for students.
The second position that I wanted to talk about was our ESOL position.
This is a determination to reduce staffing based on a
decrease in the number of ESOL students that are coming into the middle school next
year. You can see it's a decrease of 11 students projected,
but something that is a challenge to schedule and
staff for is that we test our students yearly, as is required in their
English language skills in the winter.
Those scores on the access test, it's called, become available in
May. Many students exit the need for services.
They test out of services. So last year, we had about 18% of students
exiting services. If we had that same percentage this year, and
we may or may not, because if we remember what was happening in January when the
access test was going on, we also had many students not coming to
school.
So the number may not be as high, but we still anticipate
that we will have many students exiting services.
That would be about 112 students requiring services.
So a pretty significant drop in the number of students.
The other factor is that the students that we have right now in the middle
school and entering the middle school are at a higher language level
ability than our students have been in the past few years.
Students who are beginning to learn English require more service
time,
two classes at least of ESOL instruction, versus our
students who are in the more intermediate range require one.
So the impacts on instruction of this reduction,
we really believe in a co-teaching model when it comes to ESOL, which
is a multilingual learner teacher working with a regular education
teacher, both in the same classroom.
It has wonderful impacts on student learning for all of the students in the room.
It is not a required practice, and in fact, the state doesn't necessarily
recognize that as ESOL service minutes.
We hope to continue to do that. We may be able to, depending on the number of
students who exit, but as it's not required, that might be something that changes.
However, class sizes will remain the same due to that reduced amount of
service need. And then the last
slideis sort of more detail on that.
There are two different levels, and I apologize for all of the jargon.
CALS is our more intermediate level.
Many students will be in CALS next year. They require one supported class.
Currently, we have 81 students in our CALS classes.
Those class sizes range from 4 students to 13.
The average is 9, which for students learning English is a really appropriate
size.
Next year, before we have the results of the access test, we have the
same number, so 82 with an anticipated number of nine CALS sections.
And again, we anticipate there will be fewer students needing that level of
service. Our other ESL classes will continue to have similar class
sizes, which are generally between 8 and 13 students,
such as in our humanities classes, which counts as two blocks a day, so two
amounts of service.
I believe I'm going to turn it over to Principal
Glenn. Thank you.
Good evening. Sarah Glenn, principal of the high school.
So I want to start just with a graph,
kind of sharing the enrollment at South Portland High School.
This is over the years, the first year being 2019.
June of '26 and '27 are predictions as they have not
happened.
The '26 number is our current enrollment,
and June of 2027, what is represented there, though, is what we are
predicted to start the year with next year.
So we have seen a declining enrollment at South Portland High School, and we are
projected to be at our lowest enrollment in recent
memory,
which has played into a factor in how we've been looking at our courses.
So at the high school, for proposed position reductions, there are
seven teaching positions. Four of them are from retirements and
vacancies, and they do exist across multiple content areas.
One is additionally in
the SPTA but is a non-teaching position.
To also ensure that we are offering appropriate programming
for our students, we will have revised job responsibilities for other
positions or structures in other departments.
And as mentioned,
the shared reduction of ed techs and potential movements
as expressed in the middle school presentation.
Could you go back one?
Thank you. Oops.
Sorry.
Keep going.
One more.
There we go.
Okay.
This is just where the section max is set for
most courses. I think this is relevant.
When looking at a high school schedule, it is not consistent, meaning that there is
not a class size average for every course, and that is
given based on the size, the course that is offered, different regulations.
And something that we're really proud of at South Portland High School are the
variety of courses that we're able to offer our students.
And so in these proposed reductions,
all courses are going to remain within these
ranges, and we can still allow diverse course offerings to exist for our
students, which is a value that's really important.
And so this was just to demonstrate that the section max numbers do
range across a variety of different departments and courses.
So the next slide does demonstrate some examples of
class max. Similar to what
Bethany had shared earlier, these are averages.
And within averages, in the science department alone, there are 15
different courses, and so an average is going to vary depending
on the students that have signed up and things like that.
These staffing models were run with enrollment numbers from the 1st of October from
IC, is Infinite Campus,
and we are projected to have 40 less students next year.
But for an example, in science, the class maximum is 24.
So right now, an average class size in science would be
18.8. Again, that is an average. We don't have 0.8 of a
student sitting in a course.
But next year, under the current staffing production
proposal that we have, the average class size will be
21.8, and so that we are able to still offer the same
variety of courses that we do have and be
within the class maximums that we have.
Another proposed structural change that we
are planning to make are semesterizing our courses.
And so what this means is that we would issue credit at the semester.
And so right now, as an example, if you take a year-long class, you are
issued a full credit at the end of the year.
And so this proposal would
allow you to earn credit at the halfway mark in the semester.
So after first semester in January, you could earn 0.5 of a credit,
and then at the end of the second semester in June, you could earn the
second part of that full credit, so another 0.5.
There are a lot of benefits for students for this.
It allows you to have a fresh start at the second semester.
It would allow us as a school to expand real-time credit recovery,
and it can incentivize attendance.
There is a mathematical portion in earning credit, and that if
at some point in the year you are not progressing in a class, you are aware that
you are not going to pass the course.
There are benefits for instruction for our teachers and staff.
It allows flexibility in planning and offerings.
And so some considerations in this would be thinking about offering a
more formal midterm schedule, offering additional learning lab and
credit recovery opportunities and supports.
And part of this plan would beswitching the role of
one of our math teachers to an additional learning lab teacher, and this
would allow some targeted additional math support for our
students.
That's it.
And that's it.
Good evening. Mike Nally, director of operations and safety.
Next slide, please.
So quickly to talk through some additional changes in addition to the
reduction in force within the service
department.
We are looking to decrease costs through
really limiting or trying to draw down on some of the
overtime opportunities. So we'll look to do that through decreasing
our evening shuttle schedule.
Over the last five years, there's been significant creep on that, and we
periodically, not periodically, consistently have
three or four buses on the road not assigned to a specific
sports trip, but
just moving kids to and from different activities after
4:00 PM. So our intent is
absolutely to provide that service still, but modify the
schedule so that we can gain some efficiencies, potentially decrease the
level of service, be clear on that.
Instead of having one bus going east and one going west, potentially we have one
bus doing a lap of the city. But making sure that the kids can still
participate in activities, but looking to really draw down on that service.
Another model that we're looking at, the positions that we cut, we
shifted our model from elementary schools were
traditionally staffed with three custodians.
Now they're going to be staffed with two custodians.
So to help mitigate that, the choke point in the day is, as you might
imagine, around the lunch hour. We need some extra custodial support.
The way the SEA contract's written, our CDL
bus drivers excuse me, go on the clock at 7:00.
Their day runs from 7:00 to 4:00 PM. They have an hour break in there.
So the ask for that group is to help out for two
hours in the middle of the day to support lunchroom operations in the elementary
schools. That'd be on a rotational basis.
If we go down to four schools, we have 20
drivers. So it'd be about once every five days you'd be asked to
go work in a cafeteria.
We'll work to continue to partner with Metro.
That could be a force multiplier for our evening shuttles.
I see that where they could potentially add value in helping move kids around the
city to get to various
after-school events, helping draw down on overtime opportunities as well.
So clearly, we need to meet and consult still.
I've had informal conversations as recently as today with SEA leadership,
and we'll continue to work with them to find a workable solution.
I'm going to cover the summary.
This is called the superintendent's budget.
It's really not just my budget.
There's an incredible team that's involved in this,
and they are really the ones doing incredible amounts of work.
The proposed budget is the product of many
hours of targeted work and collaboration with
our association partners, and we've been doing that for more than
four months now.
Student learning outcomes have been and will
continue to be our foremost priority.
This budget will get the school district back on
track for fiscal responsibility.
We've done an enormous amount of listening to
and valuing stakeholder feedback.
The budget proposed is one with the smallest operating
increase of the last five years and meets the city
council's parameters.
So these are some of the key decisions that the board will be
looking to make.
The first
has to do with closing
an elementary school. There's also a letter
that needs to be
written by me, and there's actually a template that's used.
And
what the board would be doing is considering closing an elementary
school and authorizing me to file a
school closing report with the Commissioner of Education.
Secondly, item 2 (1) , consideration and action for
the board to select one of the two options below
for the elementary school grade configurations to be effective with the
beginning of the 2026/27 school year.
And you've seen already option A, which is the primary
and intermediate model
buildings,
pre-K-1 and grade 2 to 4,
and option B being full grade bands
in all buildings, pre-K
to K and
up to grade 4.
Item 2.2 is consideration and action to
adopt the FY27 superintendent's budget
as the board's budget proposal, and that would be the
budget brought to the city council
workshopped on April 7th, and I believe
voted on, I believe, the 14th, if I have that right.
Mm-hmm. You do.
And I guess I do have that right.
That's the end.
So it is 20 minutes of 8:00, and I'm just going to take a
10-minute break. We'll be back in here for questions from
the board at 10 minutes of
8:00. Till
10.
Yeah, 10 minutes.
I don't know. I feel like I should have questions, but I don't understand this well
enough to have any questions. Do you?
I
can have everybody come back to their seats, please.
Everybody can come back to their seats. We can come back to order.
I also wanted to say thank you to
Joel Hatfield. There are 12 additional
seats that are in that corridor, and you can go and take
them, sit them along the back or
along this side. I would ask that you not put them along this side,
because when we go to public comment,
people won't be able to
move. So you can either put them...
I'm telling you how to block the fire escape.
But put them against this wall or across the
back. So there are 12 more seats that are
up in that
hallway out there. And thank you, Joel.
We are
at the point of questions by the board.
So,
we're going to see if we can stick to questions at this point, and then we'll
go to the first public comment. Then we'll come back to the board
for
any other statements or positions that they want to make,
and
we'll go from there. My
hope is to take another break in
90 minutes, so
we'll take that-Well,
around 20 minutes of 8:00. 20 minutes of 9:00, I'm sorry.
And I want to say that our students need to leave
early because they both have studying to do, and I see the principal
nodding her head in the-
In the audience. So, questions from board members.
Board Member Feller.
Yeah. So I've got two sets of questions, probably
six questions best answered by Abigail, bless her heart.
And then
a couple for Joe and Bethany about elementary school reconfiguration.
So I guess we could start with finance.
Abigail,
I have six questions, so if you don't mind, I'm going to ask one, maybe you provide
a response, and we keep going.
Yeah. Please, one at a time.
Okay, great. First question, do you have a rough estimate on how much we're
spending on snow plow for our schools?
I know that's something the city is not doing for us. We're paying contractors.
We've just recently surpassed our 140,000 that we thought we'd
spend. It's a lot.
Okay. That's really helpful. Thank you.
Yeah, and it's been an extra cold winter, so we will also find out how much
electricity costs at the end of this fiscal year.
Okay, so 140,000 on snow plow.
Mm-hmm.
What is the plan to seed the fund balance?
That's not part of this year's budget, is that correct?
Sorry, say that again?
We're not-
How to seed the fund balance.
How to seed?
Yeah.
Yeah. What's the plan for seeding the fund balance?
We need to develop a plan to seed the fund balance.
Yeah. And it's not in this year's budget?
No. This year is too dire. That would come at a
cost of more personnel.
Got it. Okay.
Have you modeled the impact... And I really appreciate you doing the long-term
planning. That is absolutely what we're looking for.
Yeah. Starting to.
Yeah. Have you modeled the impact on the EEPs and
other staff meetings on next year's budget?
So we know that there's a new contract with-
IEPs.
IEPs, sorry.
The-
IEP.
IEPs.
Three letters, I-E-P.
Yes.
IEP.
There you go.
I did go to elementary school.
So
what is the impact on those ancillary meetings to the budget,
and have we thought about how to limit those additional meetings whenever possible?
Right now, I've got a stock 250,000 in the budget to
take care of time after the 15 hours of IEP meetings.
We're not completely sure exactly how much this will cost.
We did some
working it out. We came up with a 240,000
estimate, $235,000 estimate. We're hoping 250
will cover it.
There is a piece of that language that's mandatory
meetings, so we are trying to
see how we can mitigate the cost of this while still
meeting our needs and meeting all of our obligations.
But right now in the FY27 budget, we've got 250,000 blocked out for it.
All right. That's perfect.
What is the supplies and materials line item associated with the Board of
Education, and why is it proposed to be $318,000 next year?
Let me see if I can find that line. Do, do, do.
Question.
Daniel, would you please repeat your question?
Yeah.
Could you repeat your question?
And repeat it a little more slowly.
Sorry. Okay.
Just remember, not everybody is a native English speaker, and we do have
interpreters here.
So on page eight-
Mm-hmm
... row
2,470, for supplies and materials
underneath the Board of Education, it says $318,000
and $220.
Yeah. Almost 200,000 of that is legal bills, and the other is
kind of similar, office supplies and the like.
Sorry, can you say that again?
Um.
Can you ask the question again and-
Yeah
... give us the answer?
So why are we spending
$318,000 for supplies and materials underneath the Board of
Education for next year's budget?
You know what, I could actually get my laptop and answer that more specifically,
but a lot of that is legal bills.
Legal. Okay.
Mm-hmm. Anticipated. Yeah.
How much interest on our debt do we pay each year?
I think you said it was $300,000.
Oh, no. So our debt is actually a combination of many
different loans.
So what I referenced was just one of our bonds,
for the athletic field. So we have one interest payment of a little shy of
100,000. Next year we'll have two of those, plus a 230
or so principal payment. But we have many bonds.
We have several layers of debt, and there's a variety of principal and
interest payments on each of those.
So the whole
cost center, 8,000,099, that's the cumulative payments that
we will owe in FY27.
Got it.
Those are all my questions for Abigail.
If anybody else-
Thank you. Other questions?
For Abigail?
Yeah.
While she's up there.
Yeah. She's going to start with those. Do we have other questions for Abigail?
Yeah.
Yes, go ahead, Member Holman.
So,
about legal bills.
Of that amount, do you have any idea what amount of
that is
a retainer for the lawyer?
Because don't we-
No
... end up paying a retainer?
No. We don't have a re-
It's strictly hourly?
No. Yeah, we pay hourly. It's not a retainer.
And just for fun, do we know how much that is per hour?
Oh, no. But good question. But it adds up to tens of
thousands.
Every month, it's a lot.
So any meeting that we call with the lawyer, we're paying for that meeting?
Oh, yes. Every-
Whether essential or not.
Mm-hmm.
Yes.
Okay.
Every personnel issue, everything, all of that is time we pay for.
Yes, Eleni?
Other questions for Abigail? Member Richardson.
In the absence of a fund balance, what happens if we have
seven snowstorms next year, or we have pending
litigation, bargaining of contracts that require legal
representation?
Mm-hmm.
How do we pay for that?
We mitigate as best we can. If we end up back into deficit, we
will, by default, draw on the city's fund balance, and then we will endeavor
to pay that back, likely by increasing the cost to taxpayers in the
subsequent fiscal year towards paying that
back.And
then
I have a more full question now that I see my laptop for
what's informing the 318.
10,000 professional services, that's pretty standard.
Professional development, 2,000 legal bills.
Legal services, about 180,000. I think that's a pretty decent estimate.
Audit services, 35 four, also a decent
estimate and based on quotes for what we're expecting to pay this
year.
Other types of insurance, it's 78,000.
That would've been based on a quote.
A light $200 for travel for professional development.
That goes with the 2,000 for professional development.
1,000 in supplies, 1,000 for textbooks, and then another
10,000 for dues and fees. Those would be-
What was the last 10,000? I'm sorry, Abigail.
Dues and fees.
Okay.
I forget what it's called, but there's an annual subscription that you all get.
Yes, Eleni?
Do we have a list of grants or pending
grants somewhere that we are tracking
to help offset
some of the-
Generally, your federal grants are supposed to be additional to-
Not necessarily federal, but actual grant
writing, applications that have been submitted.
Because I know earlier this year, late last year, it was like, "Oh, surprise,
we got this grant that we forgot about, and here it is."
Yeah. They tend to be small amounts.
It's more ad hoc.
No, we don't have a formal process and a formal list for these types of
small grants. But I can't imagine a small grant that would pay for something
like a Board of Education Association dues.
A lot of these are truly standard costs that belong on a school budget.
I just mean in general, not necessarily that specific line item.
Sorry, I have one more question.
Yes.
Go ahead.
Technology spend.
Mm-hmm.
So in the state of Maine, as I understand it,
laptops, I believe, are
paid for by the state.
There was an Angus
King initiative several years ago that did that.
Andy, maybe that's you. I don't know.
Yeah, I'm going to let Andy speak to that.
Yes, Beck. I'm Andy Wallace, the tech director for the schools.
So back in 2-- 1998 rather, there was a surplus of
funds, and they created what was called the MLTI.
People think it's the Laptop Initiative, but it's the Learning Initiative, in which
students in seventh grade were given a laptop each.
The next year, it expanded to eighth grade.
That's where it sat for a few years until people realized that
as kids got older, they were accustomed to using technology.
My first year in South Portland, we expanded out to ninth grade, and then 10th
grade, 11th, and 12th.
Every year,
we get one full grade level of free devices, as long as we don't
opt for the Cadillac device. So we, in this district, use the iPad.
And we use the higher-end iPad with the good keyboard so the kids can type and use
it as if it has a mouse on it, just like a laptop, but much more
portable. So we pay $30 per device per
kid for their one-to-one device.
That's what we pay for that. We also do, in our current model, by another grade
level, so that all the kids have devices that are refreshed
roughly every four years. The older devices get funneled down to the lower
grades. So from
grades 5 through 12, each kid has a device.
Lower grades, they just have a bunch of devices in the classrooms.
And that total cost
in the whole district is roughly $80 per kid per
year for the device that the kids have.
Thanks, Andy.
You're welcome.
Thanks, Abigail.
Hold on, Abby. Let me just see if there are any other questions
for Abigail. I have one, Abigail,
and it just has to do with the
percentage that the city council gave us for guidance.
And you spoke at a meeting about why you would not recommend that
we ask for more money from the council, and I'm just wondering
if you can speak to that and explain your rationale
behind what that would do to us in
future budgets.
Mm-hmm. I think at the end of the
day, we're going to follow our community.
And it would be very tough to go over 6%,
because anything that we add to this budget,
we will need to consider that we should expect to pay for
that year after year after year.
So if we go for more here, we should
expect to go for more every year to continue to afford
that.
Thank you.
Sorry, I do have one more question.
Please.
But we have no fund balance, right?
So the only way, and we're not a for-profit
organization, so the only way to build that back is to ask the
taxpayers for money.
That's correct. Unless we get some sort of windfall, if we
were able to sell something, generate revenue.
I'm still looking for $5 million in my backyard.
I'm still looking too.
Thank you. No other questions for Abigail?
Okay.
Not at this time.
Thank you.
And so I think we have some questions for you, Dr. Prince.
Daniel, I thought you had some-
Tyler.
... questions first. Okay, Tyler. Go ahead, Member Smith.
I want to hone in just to get things going on the elementary schools.
So what I want to start with is
just trying to-
We're trying to do questions right now. So do you have questions?
Yes, I have questions.
Okay, got you.
Thank you.
No, no, it's okay. I just want to stay focused on questions. No, that's fine.
So my question is,
if you could explain to us a little more in detail, we had the
criteria for why we're deciding on Caylor rather than Dyer.
You don't need to go through every single one of those bullet points, but if you
can just give us a few
prime examples of why Caylor was chosen.
Sure. In each of them, I'll just take a couple items.
So as we looked at
overall safety of the building, one of our primary considerations
was two points of egress,
and Caylor is at the end of a dead-end street.
So that was something that factored into that.
In addition, Dyer and South Portland High School serve
as reciprocal sites in the event of an evacuation,
and Caylor, because it's not close to another building, or you would have to come
through the fuel tanks, doesn't provide that same
facility.
We did look at the overall costs of the
buildings, and we had shared previously that Dyer had some anticipated
additional costs. But when we factored that out over a longer
term,
that wasn't as much of a driver.
In addition, I think also thinking
about the programming for the student
development needs and just the physical layout of the building,
the team feeling like the Dyer site had more
age-appropriate
configuration because it's arranged in an F shape instead of an L
shape.
And also it was a smaller number of students that would be in
movement than the student body at Dyer.
So those are a few to be representative, I hope.
Yeah. I have a good follow-up to that, which is trying to
understand,
so if we go with
the pre-K through 4 model for each one of the schools,
is
the assumption that closing Caylor will be only those
students moving, or is there a longer
term or a larger picture plan of dividing the districts in different
ways so that there's going to be multiple movement?
Because I know the big challenge is the demographic
balances.
Correct. I think for the fall of '26, it would primarily
be the Caylor families that would be impacted by a
redistricting. However, again, because we're seeking to
maximize the use of our physical footprint, we do know
on the margins of our school zones, there are other families
that may attend
Brown School now, and perhaps they're moving to the
Dyer neighborhood, or on the other side, a Brown School family that
may need to move to Small School, again, to think about
maximizing the use of our current footprint.
So again, in that model, it would not just be Caylor families, but they would
be
certainly 100% impacted.
Right.
I'll leave it there for now.
I'm sorry.
Nope.
Member Smith-
I'll just leave it there for now.
You're okay. Okay, Member Richardson.
I
just want to say something that the board hasn't said yet collectively, which
is many people
lost their jobs last week. I think this was a pretty challenging,
in fact, I heard it was maybe the most challenging week for a lot of our educators.
And on behalf of the board, I want to say that
I'm so sorry that that's happened.
I'd like to talk a little bit about
the
process for
redistricting.
So
Option A, it seems as if I'm hearing from the district
is not ready to be implemented for the fall
based on what I read.
Again, we-
Is that the recommendation that I...
I think I saw it says Option B
ready to go FY26. Option A-
We are prepared to move forward with both options.
We know that we will face a compressed timeline if the board goes
with Option A,
and we're committed to resourcing that so that it is the best for
families and communities, understanding that we are in a
very unique moment.
So we believe that we can support
being ready with
the timeline for this fall.
In Option B, what I was trying to say earlier was
if for the fall of '26, the board chose to go with Option
B of first moving to four schools with
wider grade bands,
you could still be on a path to Option A in the following fall.
So apologies if that didn't come out as clear.
No, that's how I interpreted it.
Okay.
Because whatever decision we make
for this budget can't necessarily force a decision for next budget.
So
process-wise, how does that work?
Correct. What I think the board could do is you could take
action to
hold yourselves to a study or a report
between May 1st and December 1st,
such that the future board that is seated in
December would be able to quickly move into a
discussion of what to do.
It is not 100% certain
what the outcome of that would be,
but that would be a way that you could put yourself on the path and
engage the community.
Sorry, one more question, then I'll give up the mic for a little bit because
you know me.
Okay.
Sorry.
It's all right.
Is there a way
in
this budget, and I think we have many
iterations of this budget coming.
In fact, I think we need more meetings than the one after this.
Is there a way, if we do some shifting around, to
consider a class size
policy that is influenced by the number of IEPs
in a classroom? Because
we're filling classes
and thereby increasing the number of needs in
that class with less support staff.
And that is my
biggest concern with any of these options,
understanding
that we have to close a school to save money and to save jobs,
in my opinion.
So
is there a way to do that? Because I know other districts do
provide a directive in their class size
policy to consider
needs in a classroom.
Sure. I think there are certainly ways that a board can
consider factoring in student need.
I would say IEP is not the only such need-
Sure
... whatever the demographics are.
Currently, if the board wanted to
go in that direction, we would have to find another place to
reduce in order to increase staff there, or the board
would need to be willing to exceed the 6%.
Right now,
again, we aren't able to add staff in to lower those
ratios with our current model, but certainly, if something else changed,
we could look at that directive.
Okay.
And sorry, may I go back to answer one other question that Board Member Richardson
asked? I think you were asking about beyond ESEA
title grants and local entitlement.
Yep.
What other funds. I apologize that you don't have that tonight.
We will work on getting that for you.
The only outstanding grant application that we have that
we don't know about would support community school
expansion. That's a Department of Maine grant.
We have two 50,000 grants that are outstanding right now.
Without those grants, we would have to slow our expansion.
Obviously, those dollars would allow us to accelerate.
So that's the only one that we don't know the outcome of that could
be a potential revenue source, but it's very direct what it could support.
Okay, thanks.
So I have Member Risch, Member Holman, and then Member Smith.
Member Risch.
Yeah, my questions are on process.
I've been talking to a lot of constituents in there saying this is going pretty
fast and stuff. Are we late? Did we do something wrong to
get to this position? Is there any way we could've been talking about these
numbers, say, in February?
I'm just wondering as a new board member.
I know there's certain numbers that aren't released till December, for instance.
Can you make a quick comment on that?
Sure. So the state of Maine, by law, has to release their state
allocation funding by the end of January.
So that's part of the puzzle.
I think, as Abigail spoke to an interim
superintendent and a new finance director that both started in July,
means that we've been working as quickly as possible.
And what Abigail has managed to master on our
finances side in a short order.
But certainly, appreciate that the board--
We started earlier this year, but I hear you saying that you might want to start
even earlier next year.
Maybe more dense with the meetings.
Try to
push harder. But thank you.
Thank you, Member Holman.
I have a couple questions related to special edu...
I have a couple different things, but this one is related to special education.
So,
I'm sure we're fortunate in our community that we don't have people rushing to get
their kids in special ed who don't really need to,
so that's a great thing. But do people ever leave special
education, and how
do we know if they do, and
that first comment's just because there's been a lot of articles.
Everyone must have seen those articles in the news, right, about people rushing to
get their kids in special ed so they can get them extra services, right?
But I doubt that's happening in our community, which is a good thing.
But,
do people ever-- Because that's a huge
cost, and we want to give our kids all the services they can and make
sure that they're well-served. I think Eleni is making interesting points
around that. So do they ever leave, and is that all already factored
into the budget, that some young people-
Sure
... will leave during the year?
It is. The special education process is governed
by a number of laws that we adhere to with
both a qualification process and then an annual
review of a student's services. And then there is also what's called a
triennial, or every three-year review, when we look at sort
of repeating a whole set of tests to sort of see
where is the student in their progress.
And then there is also a process whereby a student might exit
from special education services.
So our teams are constantly working on
that and working to the whole goal of special
education is to provide services in what's known as the least
restrictive environment, meaning they are with their typically developing peers
as much as possible. And I think our educators here in South Portland
are... are really tuned into creating that experience and that
commitment. So again, that is part of it,
and nationally, we know the numbers are rising.
Okay, thank you. And then another question.
I understand that there's been legislation
passed that might adjust the school funding formula.
What hope does that give us? Do we know? And what would the timing be around that?
Sure. We're still not sure of that. So it's LD 2666.
And it was passed. There's nine provisions in that
statute that would adjust school funding.
They've only modeled two of the nine provisions, so we don't
actually know. There is both the potential that South Portland could receive more,
and there's the potential we could receive less.
So again, they're working through that, but I think it's a good
sign that our legislature is aware that that
model
is due to be updated.
Okay.
I do have some more questions.
So,
the 130K that we see for transportation,
that, I assume, is taking into consideration either Plan A or Plan
B?
Am I wrong?
I'm sorry, Claire, which 130? Are you referring to a
slide or a-
Oh, gosh. I didn't get the slide number.
I forgot. I did write down what slide we were on.
Is it overtime costs?
Overtime reduction.
Oh, yeah.
Yes. So that overtime reduction-
Is taking into consideration the changes we might make?
Correct.
Okay. Thank you.
And we have
started the process to engage with School Bus Logistics as
a consultant for modeling transportation.
We are waiting for the board to make a decision on Option A or Option
B before we
complete that modeling.
But that 130,000 is not-
Okay
... has more to do with evening bus runs.
Okay, thank you. And that was addressed, I know.
I have another question, too. This is a middle school question.
I think a lot of us don't really know what is meant by related arts.
I'd like to know more about that and get a little more granular on what that is and
what types of classes are going to be offered or not offered.
Sure. Would you like to come up, Dr. Stern?
So related arts classes are everything that we do that are not
science, math, humanities. So art,
STEM, digital literacy, physical education,
health are among the offerings that we have.
We also have multiple music offerings, band, chorus,
and a music class. Our fifth graders take intro to
music, where they do both band and chorus and then
can choose one or both or neither, although
most choose both.
We also have world language offerings of Spanish and French.
Okay. And
you're saying that all of these are still going to be available?
Yes.
Uh-huh. All right.
And
how many positions were lost in that?
Four.
Okay.
Thanks.
Yeah. I've got Member Smith, and then I'll get to you.
Member Smith and then-
You can go first-
... Member Cabesa
... Angela. You can let Angela go first.
Oh, okay. Go ahead, Member Cabesa.
Thank you.
Hold on.
I just had a question when it came to
communication with letting teachers know about their
positions getting cut, because I know last year, I think that was the main issue,
communication. I know you mentioned that
teachers were getting association representation during meetings.
But I was wondering when teachers were getting their emails, were they also getting
that same representation as in
their representatives being CC'd in the email or blind copied
in there to know?
Sure. So the
associations saw the list ahead of time with
who was going to be notified. They
were not originally in copy for those,
so we did forward those communications on, and I'll take responsibility for
my misunderstanding an agreement that we had in a meeting
about that,
that we've since worked to clear up.
Thank you.
Thank you. You all set?
Mm-hmm.
Okay. Member Smith.
So I know a lot of folks here are struggling, and I am also struggling
with the decision between K4 and
two elementary school models.
It seems as though the administration's
firm
opinion and belief is that if we don't do reconfiguration this year,
that it should be very seriously considered next year.
It was presented, I
think, in a way that says, "This is ultimately what we need to get to as a
district."
Is there a way in which we can maintain K4
models? Which I think some of the benefits
really being that community
cohesiveness model where a kid is in a school for five years, their family's in
that school, all the things that
was presented. Is there a way that that is financially viable?
Or if we go with that model, are we just going to be
shooting ourselves in the foot for the next five years trying to maintain it?
Because I'm really concerned of not making that
switch to the model you've identified and
then usYou know, changing schools for elementary kids
again, and so we'll have examples of kids who are in four different schools
from pre-K to four over the next four years. It's just something I want to avoid.
Sure.
If you could kind of just speak to that.
Sure. I think certainly there's a future for South Portland
with pre-K through four schools. I
think, however, the geographic reality of our
district and the wealth distribution in housing units
means that if we maintain current boundaries
of sort of the school at the center of the
geographic center of a community, we will always
have disparity between the populations in
our schools. And I think that is the bigger
driver for the administrative team is the fact that
there is a richness that comes with kids
being in mixed community. It's why so many of us choose to work
here.
And so again, I think that is our primary driver when we think
about reconfiguration.
But certainly,
respect that the community has an affiliation, and
we know that balancing those two
things is a difficult job in front of you, and we want to
be partners in finding a solution.
And that would theoretically also be possible through a
busing system that had kids crisscrossing the city, and it's
possible to make that happen in a K four model.
Absolutely. That is something that
we can engage in looking at. There
are some historical lessons we'd want to watch
for not making mistakes, but that
certainly could be another route to a solution.
Thank you. Member Feller, and then Member Richardson.
So I have a follow-up on that. So in a scenario
where we do reconfigure the elementary schools, it seems like the
most palatable thing to the community would be, okay, if your kid goes to
kindergarten through first grade at Small School, then they're going to go to Brown
for second, third, and fourth grade.
That doesn't really impact equity all that much, right?
You have an east side of town, and you have a west side of town.
So it seems like with reconfiguration, if we're going to achieve our goal of
increased equity, which I think everyone wants,
you're going to have buses crisscrossing the town, and you're going
to stop drawing attendance zones based on geographies.
Am I getting that right?
I think
currently we draw on a north-south line most of our
boundaries. There are ways that you can draw east-west boundaries that
would lead to different outcomes.
But again-
I think it's the reverse. We draw east-west. We could draw north-south.
Right, that.
Thank you very much, Chair DeAngelis. I'm picturing my map wrong.
So again, that's what we would need to engage with the
community around, in terms of the
ways that we want to approach solving the
problem,
and what solutions or what variables are most important to
the stakeholders.
I guess I have a follow-up question.
If you had a year to plan for reconfiguration and do all the studies that you would
have to do and get community input,
how would you spend that year? What are some things that you would
look at so that reconfiguration is really a community-led decision and
people are feeling good about where we're headed?
And what I will say is that the team is
committed to meeting the timeline that the board sets out.
I think what I would say is what we would do in a year hopefully is
not fundamentally different than six months.
However, if we have six months to solve the problem, it means during
that six months, there's going to be other things like exploring a
cell phone policy that the board has wanted to do that we're not going to take on
because we're going to have to prioritize our attendance, or our attention,
excuse me, on this issue. So again,
regardless of whether we're looking at a six-month or a one-year timeline,
I think our team believes really strongly that it's the stakeholder
voices of the educators and the staff that work in
this district, the families that live in communities.
So that would be our commitment to work with
them. Again, I think it just means that
however long we have to do it, we're going to have to put some other things to the
side.
Thanks.
Member Richardson.
So just to kind of piggyback off of what
Member Feller was saying and something you said,
Joe, about
kind of digging into how the
reconfiguration would work, you mentioned community engagement,
which
I think takes time. So,
to me, that implies
that we need time to reconfigure
the right way.
And
is there a preference
amongst building administrators, particularly elementary
school building administrators, who...
And you, and I mean, we've just slashed our budget.
We're going to have to absorb that
pain significantly and reconfigure
internally to react to that.
And we're closing a school. It's a tall
order
to do all in one fell swoop.
And again, I feel like the question's been asked and answered.
We're ready to deliver on either.
Thank you.
With a compressed timeframe, that means that all of us would be
in a compressed timeframe. That is more tiring.
Yep.
And yet it also might be doing it
in one motion instead of two motions.
So I really feel like we havetried to answer
your question the best we can, that we will deliver,
and we will engage with whatever decision the board
makes.
Thank you. I have one more question backing out of elementary schools
for a moment. How
much,
or I guess, how do I say this? The reduction in staff
clearly
implicates existing contracts with positions that
remain in place. Do we have a sense for how many
positions we're going to need to meet and consult on?
Well-
That make sense, what I'm trying to say?
Yeah, it does. So for those of you that don't look at
contracts all the time, all of our contracts have a provision when there is a
change in working conditions for the employees who work under that collective
bargaining that we agree, and this is also in state law, to
meet and consult around the change in working conditions.
So again, with all four of our bargaining units, we
would have that obligation. Beginning back at the
start of March, we proactively set those meetings up
with three of our associations. We have not yet set it up with our principal.
We have board member representatives coming to each of those
meetings-
Mm-hmm
... to engage in that process. And,
again, that is really a dialogue between ourselves and the associations, so
I don't feel like I can predict
what each association
will want to talk about. Well, I can predict some obvious things, but which are
the most important ones to them.
But again, we're committed to following through with that process.
So that process
has to be initiated by the union side.
It's not-- It-
No. We already
invited them to meet and consult.
No, I understand.
Yeah.
I understand the invitations have been made.
In terms of the specific positions, because Mike's portion of the report
kind of de facto said we're going to have to meet and consult on
this.
Yes.
So to me, that indicates we know that those are the-
And honestly, that should have been on all of the slides.
Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. I guess that's my point.
Yeah.
So we have an-
Again, all of those, but the association typically brings to us
where do they perceive are the biggest changes and the
most impactful to their working lives, and then we work
from there.
Do we have a ballpark estimate number for the
amount of positions that are going to be the subject of those
discussions?
It's not necessarily done position by position.
Sometimes it's issue by issue. It might be a planning time issue, it might be
a supervision issue.
So again, not having sat down, I don't want to presume what the nature of those
conversations are.
But presumably, those all need to happen before the next school year
begins.
We have an obligation-
Like, yeah
... to meet and consult, yes.
Right. Prior to next school year when the changes were to be effective.
When the changes would go into effect, yes.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
A couple of things. I have a couple questions, but I want to go to
Members Davidson and Cabessa, because I know you
have studying, and I know you have to leave.
So I want to see if you have, A, questions, or B, want to
make some statements, because I know you're not going to get an
opportunity after we do public comment.
So-
You want to start?
You can start.
I'll drive.
Don't fight over who's going to go first.
But-
Um.
Okay. Member Davidson.
I think Angela and I's experiences are pretty cool
because we're in these systems that
these decisions affect.
I have seen the disparities in our community, and they affect
all of the levels, middle school, high school.
It's not just elementary. And for most of these students,
they're coming together during middle school and high school, so if there are
differences in their upbringing and their early education, it
shows, and it affects the middle school and high school education, whether it
be we have students who didn't necessarily receive an adequate
education in their elementary years, and now the
teachers have to divert their attention from maybe some other students
to help support these students or whatever it may be.
It disrupts the classroom and the functioning.
I do
support reconfiguration, and I think it's somewhat inevitable.
Change is inevitable. It's going to happen. It's just a matter of when.
And I also don't think it's fair
to the Kaler community, if we are considering closing
Kaler,
for them to have two transitions in their elementary
years potentially.
I don't think that's fair. So that's what I have to say.
Thank you. Member Cabessa.
I just would like to say that I agree with everything Alex has said.
I'm still listening to, reading emails, listening
to what people are saying, because I'm also kind of as confused
as the public is a little bit. But
like I said, I'm listening and hearing what the board is saying, what the
public is saying, what the public wants.
And again,
to reiterate everybody else's feelings, this is hard.
People are losing their jobs.
Students might not be in the community that they were used to,
but I just hope that the decision that we do come with
hopefully is a long-term thing that's going to help our community
positively in the next years and not
continue being a worse issue next year where we have to
cut more positions and do more. But yeah.
Thank you.
Other questions? Member Risch.
So I've been talking to some constituents in person, over the
phone, by email, and I've been kind of rationalizing a
choice for A, the reconfiguration, and my
thinking is that equity is
a big concern, and if we do the
reconfiguration, we have a chance to maybe rebalance some of the
grades. Like say second grade, we could look at the distribution of
higher needs students.
Why is that incorrect? Is there some hole or thing-
Knew you were getting to a question.
Yeah.
I just think that that's a possibility. Can you talk about that?
Is that something that we'd have to do additional, or if we were to look
at distributions you were saying of the populations?
Nope. Again, the administration has been in
favor of this district moving towards reconfiguration, for
just the reason you said, that we can create greater balance,
and provide equitable opportunities for
students. I think that the choice in front of the board
has more to do with pace than with a recommendation
that we move in that direction from the administration's point of view.
And is there some option about B that blocks that from happening?
It sounds like we'd have to do extra work to... Oh, okay.
Member Holmen.
Were you finished?
Yeah.
Okay.
So,
one of the things I've said previously, and I am coming to a question, is that
South Portland- ... public schools are really rich in pedagogical resources.
It's very distressing to know that we
are losing some of those resources, and I want to echo what Eleni said
is that,
it's
upsetting and
it comes as a shock even though we know
it's happening, and we don't
necessarily even know
who is affected. We're not given lists.
So it's a painful thing to know, and I'm really sorry about it.
And, anyway, I hope other
solutions can be found. But in the meantime,
if we look at something like reconfiguration,
several things have been said.
Worried about transitions for kids, how they can handle it.
I always felt like when I was a kid, I will say summer vacation was like a year
long, so I really would've had time to adjust mentally to things.
But parents, on the other hand, are dealing with a lot.
One of the things is how do we help parents with if
they have multiple kids, for example, the pick up and drop off.
Those are things that I do think that we need to figure out a system.
Who helps with that? How do we make that easier? Now, that's not every parent.
Some parents won't be in that position where their kids are spaced out, so
they're along in the different sectors.
But how do we handle that? Are there any ideas for
resources or ways we can help?
Sure. Again, I think that is part of a community engagement
process. I also think that we have neighbors in Saco and
Scarborough who have this model of an intermediate and a primary
grade. Bangor is further away, but we have some close by neighbors
that I think, whenever we're trying to solve a complex problem, we
want to look to who's already done this
ahead of us, and how do we learn from them?
What would they recommend that we do better?
So again, those are some of the things that we'd be thinking of, but
it would take being around tables with
families and caregivers. And again, starting that in advance
of knowing what direction we're going has felt premature.
Thank you very much. That's very helpful.
And I want to also thank you and Abigail and
all of the people who've been working so hard to create all this.
This is not an easy thing to create, and a lot of documentation has been presented
to us, and I really appreciate that.
And I also appreciate a lot of the comments we've gotten from parents talking
about what they value in the schools that their children attend.
And
we've heard of some really impressive
arrangements, the bicycle bus that we heard about.
It's really impressive, and it's a great treasure to have had something like
that. And I just want to say that
people's concern for their children is primary, and although
changes may not be the exact ones you hope for, we still
intend to have a very good school system,
although some things would be hard to adapt to, one has to
admit.
Thank you. Other questions? Member Fell.
I want to talk about the planned elementary school enrollments in both scenario
A and B. They don't seem equitable to me.
So in scenario A, which is slide 21,
Skill-
Go back to the slides.
Yeah.
Hang on. Let's see if we can get to a slide.
Sorry?
Can we get to those slides?
Anyone?
I think-
Almost.
Yeah. Perfect.
That was quick.
Okay. So this is scenario A. Perfect. Okay.
In scenario A, it appears that Skillen is four students over
capacity. Brown has room for eight more students.
Dyer has room for 12 more students, and Small has room for 40 more students.
So
in scenario B, it also appears relatively unequal, although the
discrepancies are not as large as scenario A.
So if we are going to redraw the district lines for all
schools, wouldn't we want to have the capacity more evenly distributed at all
the schools?
Correct. For modeling this budget, we have to take the whole
population of students and distribute them to the
classrooms. You also can't have...Five
kindergartens and then go to three kindergartens, or excuse me, let me
say that the other way. You can't have six kindergartens and then drop that
to four kindergartners, four
first-grade classrooms, because then you've got two groups of students that have to
move to a different class or a different building.
So again, when you're building out enrollments, you have to sort of look at total
seats created. Obviously, we would not want to put Skillen in a
four-seat over capacity. That's the total number when
you create classrooms up to capacity.
So again, we would model that more closely.
This is where we are eager for the board to make a decision so that we can
begin that process
of modeling.
So these are not necessarily the final numbers.
Correct.
Okay.
This is seats created by the number of sections at the
capacity.
Chair DeAngelis, if I might just remind, I think childcare for those who
had it ended at 9:00.
9:00, I know. Yeah. I'm all over that.
And so it's 8:45, if folks needed a reminder.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. I'm just trying to see if there
are remaining-
Sure
... board questions, and then I'm going to go to another break-
Okay
... so that people who-
Should we let people speak?
Sorry. Sorry. We got to go to another break. Okay?
That's why. That's what I'm going to do, is that they've
got to end at 9:00. Oh, I see what you're saying. Let them speak. Got you.
Perfect. Okay. Are there other questions?
I do have a question. Sorry.
Regarding
Option B with a phase towards Option A,
is there a way to...
Option
B seems
almost skewed to be inequitable on its face,
in a way that I think
we could make Option B still an equitable choice to
start.
If we
did not send any more children to Skillen,
or
if we
looked at potentially
reconfiguring the Kayler, like almost modeling-
I don't want to cut you off, but-
The question
... well, that's what I'm-
I'm getting to a question.
Okay.
Yes. I'm getting to a question.
Just because I'm conscious of what was just said.
Yeah. If anybody... Sorry. If anybody here has childcare and
wants to speak, can they start standing up so we can see them?
That's what I'm going to do as soon as we finish the questions.
Yeah, so that way we
can know if we have to rush or not.
We need to come back to board members. We're going to come back to board members.
I understand. Well, then why didn't you just say that? Let's let people speak.
Okay.
So-
... I'm ready to let people speak. I have questions as well, but I'm ready to
let people speak. So if there are people who have
childcare and want to speak first, if you would just
come up to the podium first, then we
could recognize you first. If there are people who
have kids. If not, people can start moving their way
over there, but-
And students. Yes. Thank you. That would be great.
So are there not any people who have to go get
kids?
No, I see students. I'm just saying, I just want to see if there's
anybody who needs to go to get kids.
Students are making their way over there. That's great.
Oh, cool.
Yeah.
Okay. If I can
just give my little statement about public comment
before we speak.
Sorry here.
This is the board's public comment.
It's an opportunity to listen to the opinions of the public, and the board
is here to listen. Anyone wishing to speak, if you just give your
name, and you don't need to give an address or anything, just your name.
You could give a school if you want.
Anyone wishing to speak will be asked to proceed to the microphone.
All questions will be recorded by the superintendent and/or the chair,
and will be answered at the end of public comment.
There will be no interaction between the public and board members.
No clapping, booing, or other disruptive behavior will be allowed,
please. And as a reminder, board members, board meetings are broadcast
live and recorded and posted on the city website.
So please consider the impact of your comments. Thank you. Go ahead.
Good evening. My name is Lucy, and I'm an eighth-grade student at South Portland
Middle School. I've been in South Portland's music program for four years now,
and my teachers and fellow musicians really do feel like a family.
I'm speaking on behalf of the percussion and ed tech position.
Our percussion ed tech adds so much to our band community and everyday classes.
He isn't only an ed tech. He makes it so that our band teachers can
focus on the wind players while he runs percussion sectionals in a separate room.
This makes it so that our band can progress at a faster rate.
As many of you know, percussionists play multiple instruments, meaning it
takes extra work to master the technique for all of them.
At every jazz rehearsal, he's always helping add new elements to our percussion
section and helping our drummers.
He always has a positive attitude and is always ready to answer any questions,
percussion-related or not.
My concern is that if you eliminate this position, our band teachers will not be
able to meet the needs of all students in their classrooms.
Our current ed tech is a certified special education teacher.
His presence in the room means that music education is accessible to
allOn a more personal note, South Portland's music program is
so important to me. It's what I look forward to the most out of all of my
classes. Please don't compromise our music program.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Now please, I would ask,
please, no clapping. Okay? No clapping, no booing, no
reaction. Thank you. Appreciate what the students are doing, but we're
asking that there be no reaction during public comment, please.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
Hello, my name is Samantha, and I am also an eighth grade student at South Portland
Middle School. I'm also here to talk about the position of the
percussion ed tech, as well as the
fifth and sixth grade and seventh and eighth grade physical education teachers,
because
they are also equally important in this.
I've been in the music programs at the middle school for four years now as well,
and all four years have been impacted by this ed tech.
He is highly experienced and educated in his field, and it shows.
The improvement and just overall enthusiasm to play has increased every year
in the percussion section and the entire band as a whole.
During concerts, he's almost always in the back with the percussion, even though
it's not always noticed. This makes a really
big impact, and it's seen in the music
that is produced.
He provides extra support that everyone needs, and it gets
busy for band directors. They can't always give all of their attention at
once. He's always there to be that extra help and make everyone feel
seen and supported, which I think is one of the main things about this
school district is that they want to make everyone feel seen
no matter who you are.
And
the elimination of this position and all of these related art
positions in the middle school, it may just look like a number on the grand
scale of things, but
even when a small grain of sand is moved, the entire beach feels its impact,
especially the surrounding sand near it.
Thank you very much.
Please, no clapping.
I'm asking, no clapping, please. I'm
really asking as respectfully as I can.
It takes time, and it can be threatening to
other people who might feel otherwise.
So I'm asking for no reaction during public
comment. I'm asking that for the third time.
If it continues, we will terminate public comment.
No. So please, no reaction. Thank you.
That's ridiculous.
Board Chair, just a reminder that if you have children that are in
childcare, the folks that are providing our childcare are our students
and do need to leave at 9:00. You are welcome to bring your children here, but we
would ask that you meet them down at the library to pick them up.
Thank you.
So if anybody has childcare, you can
head off to pick up your kiddos. Thank you. Yes, go ahead.
And are there any parents who need to leave?
Just
if people need to pick up kids, I'm just asking that you be allowed
to come first. Go ahead.
Hi, my name is Blair Bacon. I live in Portland, Maine, and I am a member of
the 2026 RIF.
For three years, I was the interventionist at Skillen, a
position created because South Portland couldn't figure out another way
to bridge the inequities across our elementary schools.
So we threw more resources at Skillen, hoping the noise from the
schools with the greatest needs and the most students furthest from
opportunity would dim.
I was one of those resources. The hope would be that myself and
other resources would make a
difference. In reality, it was a Band-Aid on a
wound too large.
I have a master's degree in literacy, a multilingual
endorsement. I've earned national board certification, the
highest mark of our profession, twice.
I've dedicated the last 10 years of my career working to dismantle
systemic barriers so student outcomes aren't
predictable by race or background.
The sting of losing my job for the first time in 25 years won't go
away soon.
My heart goes out to my fellow colleagues who found themselves in the '26
RIF class. I understand the destabilizing shock,
the fear, and the indignation, but I hope that in the rubble,
we find confidence to know there must be something better than
this background spin of thinking, "Will it be me this
year?
Maybe next year."
I thought my union would fight for me, only to find that in this
contract, education and professional credentials
matter second.
The only thing that matters is a date.
In my case, this date was July 10th, 2023.
That was the day the board approved my employment.
That is my number, and because of it, my time is up.
I don't list my credentials to brag, but to show you one little,
tiny bit of what we have lost.
I commend the district leadership for their perseverance.
Their latest proposal to consolidate and
reconfigure is brave.
It is the only way to face these problems head-on.
Consolidation without reconfiguring will only perpetuate the deep
inequities in our schools, and working in our elementary
schools is only one way to experience-
30 seconds remaining
... the impact of such systemic disparities.
At Skillen,
third graders who you care
Christine Dobson, I'd like to concede my time so Blair can continue.
Three minutes.
At Skillen, third graders often need reminders that being part of a
group means your immediate needs might not be met exactly
how or when you want
in the service of the whole. Some adults in this room could
benefit from that lesson. We are all on the same
team. Our target must be the best outcomes for all of
the youth of South Portland. Please take care with your
words. Slogans like "Contracts not closures"
are out of touch with the power you wield
and seem off the cuff, even though the reality of these words will
shake the foundation of even more people's lives.
Let's keep this RIF class as small as it can be.
Please. Avoid hard decisions. Trying to
avoid hard decisions by waiting for a new superintendent or
asking the city council for more money is not a good look for this elected
body.
Sometimes we must endure temporary sacrifice to achieve a
greater future.
Wield your power to move us forward.
Vote to consolidate and reconfigure.
Stop standing up for individual interests and start
standing up for each other. All boats
lift with a rising tide. Thank you.
Thank you.
Hi, my name's Lizzie Mulcahy. I don't know if I'm allowed to comment, but that was
a really powerful comment before me.
My initial thoughts and feelings are around the
pace and mostly around the trust that I think many in the room
feel like we need to rebuild to understand the pace.
And I was struck by the prior commenter, because I feel like
there's a disconnect that I want to understand more, which is I'm hearing
from educators who I really trust.
I am not an educator, and I believe that educators know how to educate my
children, and I do not . And so I am grateful that they are all
here. And I am hearing that
reconfiguration is the best path forward for an
equitable educational experience for our kids.
And yet somehow I still can't fully comprehend that because I don't
understand the why or the how or the what.
And
I am somebody who, I like to read research, and I like to understand the
evidence, and I like to base decisions off of that.
And I think I'm struggling based off of hearing the
recommendations,
from some in the audience, and obviously from those in the administration.
And then understanding
what that evidence looks like, and then how this gets implemented.
And so I think I still feel that there is an
opportunity to
pursue that community engagement and understand the pace
of this so that when it sounds like it's not an if, but probably a
when a decision gets made about how to better balance our
schools, it's done in a way that all sides
understand the how, the what, the why.
And so I think that would be, for me, most
important is there is such a broad range
of
understanding and emotion around this right now, and we need to
close that gap, I believe, in order to do this well.
So, I would recommend, I think what I heard from the administration
is that they absolutely could do reconfiguration right now.
I also hear there is so much on their plate and there is so much that
has changed. And so, while I appreciate that they probably
can,
I would like us to
do this in the best way possible, and I think that's with slowing the pace and
taking this in a stepwise approach. Thank you.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Jess Elsner.
I'm a Cayler parent. I'm also a property owner in South Portland, and I
also run my own small business here in South Portland, so there's lots of
taxes.
If you can speak right into that microphone. Thank you.
Well, I guess I'm going to start just by saying or reminding for people that don't
know, Cayler is approximately 45%
BIPOC and 30 to 35%
multilingual learners. So actually my question, and
whether it's school board or the administration, but my question is
can the school board or the administration explain the
exact steps that were taken to ensure that
when we were deciding to close Cayler, that the Title VI
wasn't being violated?
Anybody?
You're not going to get an answer till the end, so keep going.
Okay. So then in that case,
from my perspective it seems like
there's actually a lot of things
that were overlooked and that some of these solutions in
actually both,
would end up violating that for the population of Cayler school.
So really, I'm just wondering about that.
Thank you.
Hi.
First off, thank you school board and the administrators and thank you for the
community who came out tonight to support all of us.
Just start with introducing yourself, please.
Thank you.
Thank you, Rosemary.
That's all right.
Yeah.
My name is Sam Elsner.
My wife and I bought our home in South Portland 15 years ago.
It's hard to imagine that.
She's from South Portland, and her parents are longtime business owners
here. Well,
time flies.
After 15 years, we have two darling kids.
My wife
herself is a small business owner,
and I'm a vice president at a software
companyMy kids attend Kayler School.
To get there, we walk,
and we ride our bikes and our scooters, and sometimes we take my
daughter's pink little car, driving car, little
safari Jeep with the battery-powered thing. We ride it into Kayler.
It's fantastic.
We play in Kayler's playgrounds. We attend
events and fundraisers at the school.
We volunteer with the Kayler PTA. We just made a few thousand bucks for the Kayler
PTA, by the way. It's pretty awesome. Whoop-whoop.
We're close with our children's teachers and our staff and the faculty at Kayler.
We're a neighborhood, and we're a community.
And after 15 years, another thing has actually become true.
My property taxes are close to $10,000 a year.
So I'd like to ask two questions, just two.
So if we proceed with the school closure, what
decision framework are you going to use to evaluate option A and B?
And will you present your findings to the community before
finalizing a decision?
Question two,
if you don't reconfigure it this year through option A,
have you considered
the difficulty of accomplishing a move to option A later
while trying to find a superintendent to execute that
reconfiguration?
And I'd just like to say that if we don't choose option A, and instead we just
redistrict on top of taking away
the child's community, part of their neighborhood, well, it seems that we're not
really considering ourselves one school system after all.
Thank you.
Thank you, Sam.
Yes, go ahead.
My name is Shay Cupid, and I'm the literacy specialist at Kayler School.
Surprised myself that I'm coming back up here.
My 10-year-old self wouldn't really believe that I'd be speaking to this large
group- ... and sharing my thoughts and my perspective,
especially when there may be contrast to others' experience
and opinions. But here I am because the moment we are in feels
pivotal, and the timing is urgent.
First, to the board, I hope you will continue to center your decisions on the
need to balance the budget while most importantly considering the structure that
would create the best possible learning conditions for all students moving forward.
To families and community members, I hope we can approach this moment with openness
and a willingness to work together, even when uncertainty feels high, which
in turn may bring up feelings of fear and unease, but also invites
us to listen more closely, ask questions, and support one another through the
process.
To my colleagues, I want to acknowledge the weight of what we've been carrying, not
just in recent weeks, but over a sustained period of change and loss.
We have all had to adapt, absorb new challenges, and keep showing up for students
and families through ongoing uncertainty.
It is heavy, overwhelming, and exhausting.
As a district, we have experienced significant losses for quite some time, and this
month in particular has been especially hard.
Like many of our schools, Kayler experienced immense loss this past week.
In many ways, it feels like as a district, we have reached what could be described
as rock bottom as we try to envision what comes next for our students,
our families, our staff, and our schools.
And yet, I say that not without hope.
I am an optimist at heart, and I have deep confidence in the dedicated
educators we have in South Portland.
If we are at rock bottom, then we also have an opportunity to begin rebuilding with
intention, with care, and with a shared commitment to moving forward.
I'm inviting us all to come to the process first with pause and reflection.
As we navigate what comes next, I am hopeful that as a community, we can consider
how we communicate, collaborate, question, and act from a shared belief
in growing a stronger community in partnership with one another.
One thing I've been reflecting on, especially as each week we have seen the
proposal of a different school closing, is that a school is not defined by its
building. It is defined by the people within it, the relationships, the
culture, and the shared work of educators, students, and families.
Those relationships are deeply meaningful and in many cases long-standing, and they
are worth honoring. However, that kind of environment is not tied
to a particular building. It can exist wherever we choose
to prioritize relationships, collaboration, and a shared commitment to students.
30 seconds remaining.
Collectively, we have the power to create that environment through any model when
we keep students and the community that supports them at the heart of our
decisions.
Melissa Scheltry, parent,
teacher, and taxpayer in South Portland, and I'm going to let you continue
listening to her.
I understand that the timeline for reconfiguration feels fast.
It's natural to question how we could be ready for students in four new
schools by the end of August. And in truth, I think the answer is
that ready is not a fixed endpoint we ever fully arrive at in
education. The work is ongoing. The to-do lists are never
complete. The learning never stops.
And still, we show up every day and do the work required to teach our
students. I have already shared my support for grade band
reconfiguration, and I won't use my time here to restate those points.
Instead, what I hope to emphasize is how we can move forward together from here.
As a profession, as a staff, and now as a community, we have experienced
division from many different directions in recent years and
months. My hope is that as we navigate this transition, we can shift our
focus toward asking questions such as, "What will create the best
possible learning conditions for students?" And, "How can we use a
solution-oriented approach to address the inherent constraints and valid
concerns families and staff will experience with a shift to our elementary school
structure?" And equally important, "How do we get to the best
possible outcome in the most challenging of circumstances
together?" There cannot be a single school of students, staff, and
families that faces the bulk of the change and challenges that will come from one
school closure. We are a community who has shown in the face of
adversity how we come together to do what is best for all members, and this should
not be any different.There are real challenges ahead
with the reconfiguration model, including the very real concerns about
transportation and the impact of moving away from K to four community structures
that many families and school communities value.
Rather than minimizing those concerns, I hope we can approach them collaboratively.
That means taking the time to ask thoughtful questions such as, how can the
district work with families, staff, and community members to develop solutions
that address these challenges in thoughtful and practical ways?
If we keep students at the center, and if we remain willing to listen, problem
solve, and build together, I believe we can move through this transition in a
way that not only meets logistical needs, but also strengthens our
sense of community and shared purpose of providing the best
educational opportunities for all the children in South Portland.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next speaker.
Thank you.
Samantha Coatsir, South Portland taxpayer, educator, and parent.
Being a multidimensional stakeholder, I see all sides.
As a parent, I struggle to understand how we would manage multiple drop-off
locations if we have grade span schools.
As a taxpayer, we are stretched thin already, with childcare costs exceeding
our mortgage. As a human being, I do not want to perpetuate the
inequities that currently exist within our district.
And as a teacher, I can see the benefits of a
reconfiguration. I do not want to close a school.
No one does. But I don't want to be in the same position a
year, two years, or five years from now because we made the wrong decision in
2026.
Two things can be true at once. I strongly dislike the disruption this
will cause, and I can see the opportunity within a
pre-K through first grade and second through fourth grade reconfiguration.
If we must close a school for the '26 to '27 school year, which I
do believe is inevitable, I implore the board to support option A with
grade span reconfiguration.
Families want to feel heard. We want our concerns validated and addressed.
Including myself, my family is looking at three different elementary schools and a
daycare with the same arrival time.
This poses real logistical complications.
My husband will either need to sacrifice work time and ultimately income to
additional driving, and/or we will need to pay for some form of
childcare after finally exiting the financial grip of private pre-K.
Long bus rides before and after a full school day hardly feels like a great
solution. These concerns are real and should not
be dismissed. However, we also cannot remain
paralyzed by them. We need to be solution oriented.
Could transportation be designed with a priority to limit bus ride
times? Could school supported carpools be created?
Could a before care program for multi-children families be offered at the rec
center with busing from there? There are solutions, we just need to commit
to finding them.
Families value the continuity of a K to four model, the relationships, the
role models, the sense of community.
That feels like a loss with a reconfiguration.
But can we see beyond the problem? Could we create buddy school
systems, shared events, or reading buddy programs between the primary and
intermediate schools to build and maintain those connections?
Maybe these ideas are good, maybe they're not.
But the point is that families need to see empathy, proactivity, and a
willingness to problem solve.
Seconds remaining.
That is how you build trust during change.
If a plan to collect and address family concerns in a systematic way could be
created, we could move forward with a reconfiguration in a way that brings people
along rather than leaving them behind.
Initially, I leaned toward maintaining a K to four model.
But after listening and reflecting, I've changed my thinking.
If we simply close a school and redistribute students, those students are dropped
into existing social groups. For students who already struggle socially, that
becomes even harder.
That's three minutes.
Thank you.
Hi, I'm Mary Beth Fellers, a parent, resident, SOPO
teacher.
Just say you yield your time.
I yield my time.
Thank you.
A grade span model-
Thank you. No, thank you
... creates larger peer groups, increasing the likelihood that students can find
connection and belonging earlier. That matters.
This situation is not the fault of any one school community, so no
single community should bear the brunt of this burden.
This Hunger Game mentality is everyone sitting in their respective schools and
communities crossing their fingers, hoping and praying that anyone but them is
called as tribute, is an unhealthy and dangerous mindset for
families, educators, and students that are meant to function as one
community.
I know how it felt when I thought my school, Dyer, was closing.
I'd be lying if I didn't say I felt relief once it was off the chopping block,
but now I also deeply empathize with the Keeler community.
I beseech every South Portland community member to think of the students, families,
and teachers at each of the South Portland elementary schools with the
empathy that you would want if it was your school.
Widen your lens. With a closure being the only viable option to
address this budget crisis, you must consider reconfiguration so that
students and staff from one community are not thrust into other preexisting
communities, but rather, we could build new communities together in a meaningful
way.
I hear the argument that we don't have time to plan
and that we should close a school now and plan for next year.
That seems crazy to me. That approach will put us right back here
again with even more disruption. Teachers and families cannot
sustain this level of instability.
Teachers and students cannot be shuffled around two years in a row.
Closing a school without reconfiguration is a band-aid.
It addresses the symptom, not the problem.
Change next year would be hard and imperfect, but dragging it out would be
harder. Let's take advantage of the opportunity to do something good out of it
in one fell swoop, rip the Band-Aid, and let the healing begin.
A grade span model offers immense benefits for students.
It allows same grade teachers to collaborate daily, share expertise, and better
meet student needs. It allows for more flexible grouping and more effective
support for students who need it most, rather than attempting to solo the
Everest of differentiating and scaffolding instruction for a max capacity
classroom with high-end diverse needs.Right now, students in the
same district are not receiving equal opportunities.
That is an inequity-
30 seconds remaining
... we have the chance to address. The board's goal should be to choose an option
that addresses budget concerns, avoids overcrowding, and equalizes learning
conditions. I believe a grade span reconfiguration meets that
goal. Lastly, we must ensure that a strategic plan is put in place so
we do not find ourselves in this catastrophe again.
Change is hard, but if we approach it with empathy, thoughtful planning, and a
commitment to solutions, we can move forward together. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good evening. Can you hear me?
You got to go right up to it.
Okay.
It's a weird microphone,
sorry.
It's okay. My name is Lauren Beer, Special Education Ed Tech at Brown
Elementary School, and I'm reading a statement on behalf of Daphne Demers,
a K through two special education teacher at Brown Elementary School.
Earlier this month, I spoke about the importance of continuity for students
with disabilities, not only in where they attend school, but in the
environments and relationships that support them every day.
As you consider the reconfiguration options tonight, I want to speak in
support of a full grade band model in the remaining schools, while
also acknowledging the very real impact of these decisions on the students and
staff at Caylor.
These are specialized programs at Caylor that serve students with
complex needs. Any decision that results in those programs being
disbanded or relocated will have a significant
impact. Students will be asked to adjust not only to new physical
spaces, but to new teams, new routines, and new ways of
receiving support. That kind of change is not small,
and it deserves thoughtful planning and care.
This is exactly why continuity matters so much.
For students with disabilities, transitions are not just logistical.
They can directly affect regulation, behavior, and access to
learning. Each transition requires time to rebuild trust,
reestablish supports, and create a sense of safety and predictability.
A full grade band model does not eliminate all disruption, but it
reduces future transitions for students across the
district. It allows students to remain in one school for a longer period
of time,
building relationships with staff who come to understand their needs and support
their growth over time. In a moment that already involves
significant change, choosing a model that minimizes additional
disruption moving forward is critical.
For many students with disabilities, stability is not simply beneficial,
it is foundational to their ability to participate in school and make
progress. Thank you for your time and your thoughtful consideration of all
students impacted by these decisions.
Thank you very much.
Good evening. Mike Fletcher, South Portland.
I have a letter I'm reading here on behalf of excuse me, Erica
Scarano,
the seventh and eighth grade band and music teacher at the middle school.
She's unable to attend as she's performing with the Casco Bay Wind
Symphony tonight in Massabesic.
She says, "I remember well the budget crisis the district faced last year.
At the time, I saw colleagues navigating uncertainty and never
imagined I would be in the same position just one year later.
As someone new to the district, I can't speak to every past experience,
but I can speak to what I've seen and what is at stake.
This is my 13th year teaching band, and I want to share what
this work actually looks like.
At SPMS, our classes include every instrument family,
with class sizes up to 50 students.
In a single rehearsal, we may be managing 20 or more
distinct musical parts, essentially
coordinating multiple ensembles at once.
Percussion alone is like teaching an entire separate group.
These students must learn a wide range of instruments, each requiring
its own technique and instruction.
This is not something that can be effectively taught all at
once without support.
Our percussion ed tech makes all that possible.
He provides individualized instruction to percussion students
while the other two teachers teach the wind players,
allowing the full ensemble to progress together.
Beyond that, he is also learning wind instruments to support
struggling sections and helps maintain continuity
by stepping in as a substitute when needed.
The level of flexibility and expertise is
unique to his position and invaluable within the district.
The proposed elimination of this position would have a
direct and lasting impact on students across grades
5 to 12, as well as the overall strength of our music
program.
At a time when the district is facing difficult financial
decisions, it is important to recognize that his role
represents a small fraction of the total cost,
yet provides an outsized benefit to students.
An ed tech with his expertise, education-
30 seconds remaining
... and longevity
is a massive bargain for the district.
I urge you to reconsider eliminating his possession.
And on a personal note, I'd like to leave you with some words from a
very wise
past board member,
Ralph Baxter, who always has said, 'Make
this budget your own. Do not be
rushed into making a quick decision
just to save time.'"
That's three minutes.
Thank you.
Good evening, Sarah
Hi, I'm Sarah Maxo. I'm an elementary teacher here in the district.
During the 2024-25 school year, South Portland schools developed the
following equity commitments. We believe in the unlimited capacity
of all students and hold all students to high expectations.
We use data to drive equity and close opportunity gaps.
We use our resources, especially time, with urgency and
intentionality in pursuit of excellence for all students.
We embrace our responsibility and capacity to make a difference in our students'
lives. We commit to interrupting injustice and take
action for equity. Two weeks ago at the board workshop, I stood
here and spoke with you about the concentration of needs that currently exists in
two of our five elementary schools, Skillen and Cayler.
I also followed up with three board members regarding the inequities that
exist as a result of this concentration of student need in an effort to
paint a clearer picture of how these differences play out in our classrooms.
I'm curious to imagine how option B is even a consideration.
If Cayler closes, 142 K to 4 students will
need placement in other schools. Based on the class
configurations and the current kids enrolled at each school,
Skillen would have room for 68 students, Dyer
52, Brown 35, and Small 28.
That would mean that half of Cayler's students would be absorbed by Skillen, a
school where the concentration of need is already beyond capacity,
placing students into classrooms of 20 to 24 students.
The inequities would only be exacerbated by this plan.
I need someone to help me understand how this promotes
equity in South Portland Elementary schools.
While I knew conversations about school closings and reconfiguration would
bring up big feelings, I did not anticipate the level of divisiveness we
are seeing. As educators and parents, we ask our kids every day
to be respectful, responsible, empathetic, kind, and
inclusive. I find myself wondering, how are we doing at
modeling these same things right now?
Whether you've chosen to speak up or to stay quiet, I think there is a question in
front of us all. What are we each willing to do,
change, or give up so that all kids can get what they
need?
I think we have to ask ourselves, what am I personally willing to
do to live up to the commitments we say we value?
I understand that each elementary school has its own pride, its own mascot, its own
identity, and deep love for its community. These are good things.
30 seconds remaining.
But they cannot become more important than our shared responsibility to every child
in our city. At the end of the day, we are not four or five separate
elementary schools. We are one elementary system serving all
students. My hope is that whatever decision is made, we commit just as
much energy to rebuilding trust as we have spent debating
change. Our students are watching how we handle hard things.
I hope that we can move forward remembering that we are not separate schools
protecting what is ours, but one community-
Three minutes
... responsible for all of our students.
Thank you, Sarah.
Hello. My name is Kim Clark, and I am a Cayler
parent.
I do not want Cayler Elementary School to close, as I'm sure none of you would want
your kid's school to close. I understand that as a district, we must
make difficult decisions to meet our budget requirements.
However, the current approach is dividing our community, pitting neighborhoods
against one another, while only elevating the voices of a few.
We should be prioritizing strengthening our community and fostering
opportunities for students to build meaningful relationships across South Portland.
Just a few weeks ago, closing a school was not even under consideration.
At that time, the discussion was focused on reconfiguring our schools.
Tonight, option B is proposing closing a school and redistricting.
According to the, this is the technical name, the ES models for
the board spreadsheet, which states the savings associated with each of the
proposals, these two options result in essentially the same financial
savings, a different of
$86,200. But they have
very different impacts on our community.
Reconfiguration offers a path that brings people together.
It creates greater opportunities for collaboration and consistency across grade
levels and ensures that the responsibility for change is shared more
equitably across the district rather than concentrated in one community.
My question to the board is this: If option B is a viable option,
why is just reconfiguration no longer being seriously
considered when the financial savings are similar, but reconfiguration
is also strengthening our community?
Lastly, I would just say that if closing a school is truly
unavoidable, I think the only responsible option would be option A.
Thank you.
Thank you, Kim.
Hi, my name is Debbie McNeany. I'm a parent of a Dyer student, a
resident of South Portland,
and I'm up here
to talk about how
evaluating the potential transition to the
grade band model Pre-K, one,
and two through four. I'm advocating for a 12 to
18 month planning and implementation window.
I would also like to note that today is March 23rd.
Kids go back to school this August, not in September.
And at a maximum, we're looking at five months of planning currently, not
six. And so technically, I am advocating for
option B with proper planning for A.
While the grade banding offers intriguing opportunities for teacher
collaboration, resource equity, its success is entirely
dependent on the equity and the quality of the transition.
A rushed implementation risks logical
frictionStaff burnout, and most importantly,
disruption to our students' stability
during a critical development window.
To ensure a successful grade band model, I propose that our planning
timeline prioritize the following three pillars: operational and
facility readiness, academic and special education
continuity, and community and social emotional buy-in.
With regard to operational and facility readiness, splitting the grades
necessitates complete overhaul of our transportation tiers. We've heard that.
We need adequate time to model these routes and ensure that families with
children in all buildings are not burdened by conflicting schedules or
excessive bus rides. Missed stops and long bus rides are a real
risk, especially with our young students.
We should take the time to properly plan in order
to minimize the first week/month of chaos.
Secondly, academic and special education continuity.
The move from first grade building A to a building
B represents a new additional transition for our students.
To prevent learning gaps, I believe our educators should be able and
be required to have dedicated professional development
time to align curriculum and transfer institutional knowledge.
This is especially vital for our students with IEPs and 504
plans, where a seamless handoff between administration teams is a
non-negotiable.
Delaying the implementation to '27-'28 school year
would allow for proper alignment.
And then thirdly, community and social emotional buy-in, and this is a
big one.
A school is more than a building.
It's a community.
30 seconds remaining.
And we need to allow families emotional runway to process this change.
This includes hosting transition nights, merging PTA structures,
and allowing students to visit their future buildings well in
advance.
Sorry. I think research shows
that a top-down approach changes,
without significant community dialogue often face
significant resistance and can overshadow the educational
benefits of a plan like this. Research also shows
that every school move can temporarily impact student
achievement. While we can build a
bridge program, tours, buddy events-
That's three minutes
... and joint assemblies to ensure-
Name's Gabrielle Mahowski, and I cede my time
...
to ensure that students feel at home in their new buildings before day one.
We have an opportunity to get this right, and by committing to a
deliberate 12 to 18-month timeline, I believe we move from a
position of reacting to change
from one to leading to transition.
We can build a roadmap that prioritizes the stability of our
students and the trust of our families. Thank you.
Thank you.
My name is Jamie Watson. I'm a teacher at South Portland Middle School.
We all recognize that this is a challenging financial moment for our district.
However, there is a deep concern that the reductions being considered may not
reflect the values we hold as a school community.
The current proposal disproportionately impacts student-facing
positions, those individuals who build daily
relationships with students and families and directly support learning.
When we reduce these roles, we are just not cutting positions,
we are reducing connection, consistency, and opportunities for students to thrive.
I want to emphasize that this is not about questioning the contributions of any
individual, but rather about reviewing positions and resources in a way that is
fair and aligned with student needs.
I am speaking tonight on behalf of three groups, as the K-8 Physical Education
Department head, as the SPTA representative for the seventh and eighth grade
teachers, and also sharing my own
opinion statement.
This is from the Physical Education and Related Arts teachers at SPMS.
The proposed reductions to Related Arts at the middle school include two PE
teachers, a computer science teacher, and a STEM teacher.
These cuts are deeply concerning.
These changes will significantly impact both staff and students.
Related Arts teachers will be required to teach additional classes, increasing
instructional time to approximately 250 minutes per day compared to 200
minutes for core content teachers.
This equates to significantly more teaching time each week with reduced
planning time. Related Arts planning time will be reduced by 250
minutes a week. At the same time, teachers will be expected to plan for additional
grade levels, manage flex and connections periods, and fulfill
supervision duties. This raises a fundamental question of equity and
workload and expectations. As one of my colleagues on the Related Arts team
noted, while our district rightly emphasizes equity, these
cuts feel applied selectively depending on the context.
For students, the impact is equally troubling.
They will lose consistent access to STEM and computer science
experiences. Even more concerning, physical education will be reduced to
only a half year. Some students, particularly those enrolled in band,
chorus, world language, or learning lab, may lose access to physical
education altogether. Cutting the PE department in half doesn't just remove
classes, it removes critical support for students' health, learning, and
wellbeing. This stands in contrast to the recommendations from the Society of
Health and Physical Educators, which suggests that middle school students receive
approximately 225 minutes of physical education per week.
Currently, students at SPMS receive 175 minutes each
week. With the proposed cut, students lose substantial physical activity.
Seconds remaining.
At SPMS, physical education is also uniquely positioned to
serve 800-plus students year-round and has supported health
instruction when needed. These cuts significantly diminish that
capacity. It's also important to note that SHAPE recommends
150 minutes of physical education per week for elementary students,
yet we are currently far from meeting that standard.
At present, our elementary students only receive 45 minutes of PE each
week. SHAPE guidelines are the framework we use to align our essential learning
targets or our ELTs-
That's three minutes
... in physical education.My name is Lori Milton.
I'm a teacher in South Portland, and I yield my time. Thank you.
Making this gap especially concerning.
With cuts to our SEL programs, PE is a class that helps students reduce stress,
anxiety, and depression. PE teaches teamwork, communication, and leadership
in real-life situations. Students learn how to handle conflict in a healthy
way, and these life skills extend far beyond the gym.
I now am representing the seventh and eighth grade teachers.
These are questions that they have.
If the middle school can effectively function with three administrators, why is
there rationale for high school maintaining three admin plus a dean of students?
Has admin explored scheduling IEP meetings during the school day and having a sub
cover rather than having those meetings after school?
How was the teaching contract allocated to the DEI
coordinator strategist position?
Have we revisited the 2019 budget to evaluate which positions were added
using COVID-related funding and whether those positions are still necessary given
the declining enrollment? Has there been a review of non-student facing
roles, positions that do not directly involve planning, teaching, or assessing
students to determine if reductions could be made there first?
At the middle school level, some buses are transporting 20 or fewer students.
Have we explored consolidating routes to reduce cost?
Has the board considered engaging bargaining units in discussions about reducing
non-student days? For example, what cost savings might be realized by
eliminating an August teacher work day and the October teacher work day?
Has the board and the administrator consulted with bargaining units regarding the
possibility of a salary freeze or a reduction in the percentage of proposed salary
increases? Have we evaluated the necessity of the safety director
position which was established during the COVID period?
If retained, consider redistributing responsibilities by assigning an
assistant level support within the building and the grounds, food service,
transportation to improve efficiency and reduce redundancy.
Why are we talking about cutting the percussion teacher again?
Didn't we realize how important this position was to the district last year?
"These slides are being shared just to justify and smooth over a reduction in
staffing." This is a statement from a teacher.
"These slides do not reflect what many teachers know will be a true impact.
I hope we can all do the right thing and reconsider these cuts if and when we have
support from the states."
And finally, my personal statement.
I respectfully urge the board to take a closer look at what reductions are being
made before eliminating additional student-facing teaching positions.
I ask that you consider whether there are non-student facing roles-
30 seconds, Lori
... or operational efficiencies that could be adjusted instead.
As a PE teacher and the athletic liaison at SPMS, both of
which now have been eliminated, I am deeply saddened by the fact that I will no
longer be able to serve the students who mean so much to me and leave a school I
have been with for 22 years. I worry that without someone housed at
SPMS to support their athletic needs, our student athletes may be left without the
guidance and advocacy they deserve.
I firmly believe that all students should have access to PE year-round, and it is
essential not only for their physical-
Six minutes
... health, but their mental health and wellbeing.
Thank you.
Good
job.
No clapping, please. Thank you.
Good job.
Hello, my name is Jen Fletcher. I'm an instrumental music educator at South
Portland Middle School, currently in my eighth year in the district, and a lifelong
resident of South Portland. I'm here to talk about bands, but not necessarily
great bands.
378 days ago, I stood at this same podium to speak against proposed
reductions to a general music position, as well as the percussion instructor ed
tech position. It is disheartening to be here once again, facing
continued cuts to our music program.
Tonight, I urge you as a new school board to reconsider the proposed budget
reduction that would eliminate the percussion instructor ed tech position at both
the middle school and high school.
Since the mid-1980s, this role has been an integral part of our music department,
supporting both instrumental and choral programs in ways that often go
unseen. This position provides continuity and stability for our
students, stepping in to lead rehearsals whenever any of our three band directors
are absent, ensuring our students never miss a beat.
The percussion instructor supports our choral programs, performing in their
concerts, assisting students, and often managing our lights and sound.
And they maintain and repair equipment that extends the life of our instruments
well beyond expectations, saving the district significant funds.
And these are just a few of the behind-the-scenes support that go beyond the
teaching that happens in the classroom.
To offer a personal example, my fifth and sixth grade band classes range from 18 to
45 students, but are most often between 35 and 45.
And it is not just 45 students. It is 45 students with instruments
being played all at once. Flutes, clarinets, saxophones, trumpets, trombones,
euphoniums, and all percussion equipment. And it happens four times a day.
It can be challenging, chaotic, and incredibly rewarding, but it is the support
of the percussion ed tech that makes these large classes successful and ensures
every student can participate in band without cuts or exclusions.
This role directly teaches and supports more than 80 percussionists in grades fifth
through 12th, and approximately 500 instrumental students across our district.
Our current percussion ed tech is a certified special education teacher and uses
that expertise daily to expand access for our students with IEPs and 504
plans. The impact here is significant.
While district enrollment may be decreasing, enrollment in the music program is
rapidly increasing each day.
On slides 50 and 58 of the budget proposal, this position is described as being
relocated along with other ed tech roles, but due to the specialized
nature of this position, there is no true relocation.
It will eliminate the services it provides, services that directly impact our
students and the strength of our music program.
Of the six ed tech III positions proposed for reduction, five of them are currently
or will be vacant at the end of this year, leaving the percussion instructor-
30 seconds remaining
... to be the one position that is currently held by an employee to be eliminated.
I would like to close by saying this. Related arts are not extras.
Our classes and our educators deserve to be valued, treated equitably, and
supported with the same respect as any core subject.
Our classrooms are places where many students truly come alive, where they discover
their passions, build confidence, and feel seen in the ways they may not elsewhere.
The cuts to the South Portland Middle School related arts team are devastating.
It is difficult to understand why our department is absorbing such a
disproportionate impact and even harder to accept that those who remain-
That's three minutes, Jen
Jess Broda, South Portland Middle School.
Jen can have my time
It is even harder to accept that those who remain
will be asked to take on additional classes while losing 250 minutes of our prep
time per week. We continue to hear phrases such as, "It's positions, not
people," and, "It won't impact students." But the reality is it will
impact students, and it is always people.
Dedicated educators who have given years to this district, professionals who have
shaped students' lives and strengthened this community.
And with these reductions, they are not just positions being eliminated.
They are people we will be losing from our school.
The decisions you make in this process will not just be felt on a spreadsheet or in
a slideshow. They will be felt in the classrooms by students who lose access,
support, and opportunity. Thank you.
Thank you, Jen.
Good evening. My name is Emily Stevens.
I am a lifelong resident of South Portland, a teacher, and a
parent in the district.
As an itinerant teacher, I've had the privilege of working in every
building in South Portland by this 14th year of my career,
and I can attest that every school has its own unique and wonderful
culture and community.
I do support the reconfiguration proposal Option A, but
it does need to be done mindfully and intentionally, bearing in mind that you
will be hard pressed to find a school community that would stand up and
say that their school should be the one to close.
Further, I believe closure and reconfiguration
should happen at the same time. The disruption to staff and
students for two huge changes one year after the next is
unsupportable.
I am disappointed in our district that we are currently in such a reactive
state and time crunch with this move.
If we get a magic wand in the form of a special allocation to increase
education funds for financial year '27
from the state budget's appropriations committee, I hope the board will
seize the opportunity to additionally bridge the funding gap for one
year with intentions to follow through with future plans for closure and
reconfiguration and treat this massive change at elementary with
the same respect as the recent consolidation of our middle school.
South Portland Middle School had two years of preparation for the new community,
with dedicated time and professional development for bringing together
both middle schools and all of the fifth grade cultures, and I would hope
that we would prioritize the same consideration for our elementary communities.
I am heartbroken for and about the number of amazing educators
across the district who received notification last week that they will not be
employed next year. The number of elementary classroom teachers
alone on the list is staggering.
I fear that our district will find it increasingly challenging to hire and
retain quality staff with the constant fear around the loss of
positions year over year. We are already losing so many.
I also have concerns about the elementary support positions proposed to be
cut. With a district goal of more evenly filling up class
sizes, there only stands to reason that there will be an increased
need for strategist and support roles with the increased class
sizes. The MTSS and behavioral strategist roles seem
particularly critical for increased class sizes in elementary.
As far as the middle and high school levels go-
30 seconds remaining
... again, I've been all the buildings. Thank you.
I am frankly ashamed that we continually put forth our percussion ed tech role as
one to be cut. This is critical instruction for our music students, and I'm
disappointed in the loss of computer science at both middle and high schools and
wonder what the plan is to replace this learning.
Our financial reality is that change must be made, but our students, families, and
staff deserve an intentional and thoughtful plan.
Our current plan feels reactive and rushed and not one that prioritizes the
people. Thank you.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Andrew Giggler. I'm a special education
ed tech at Dyer Elementary.
I appreciate the effort made to provide transportation and translation services for
tonight's meeting. I did not notice a similar effort made in past meetings
that involved talking about the budget cuts.
It is possible this happened and I was unaware.
Regardless, the transparency and timeline of this process has been extremely
disappointing to witness. 17% of students in the South Portland
School Department are classified as multilingual learners.
I've heard repeated statements made by district administrators and school board
members saying that they want what is best for students in this
decision. How is this possible if there are not efforts being made to
include the families of our multilingual students in this process?
Letting staff know that they are losing their job three months before the end of
the school year is simply unacceptable to me.
At least one qualified and essential special education staff member
is being cut, possibly more, which I don't know about yet, and this person
has been very committed to their students for years, helping to ensure
the well-being and safety of some of the most vulnerable students in our entire
school department. Additionally, every ed tech one will lose their
job after this school year, to my knowledge.
During the 2024 to '25 school year, ed tech
ones on the lowest step made $16.98 per
hour. If they work seven hours a day with
175 school days in the year, that means they earn approximately
$20,800 per school year. For
context and in comparison, here are some of the top
salaries of school administrators from the
2024 to '25 school year.
That school year, Superintendent Timothy Metheny made approximately
$158,000.
Assistant Superintendent Dr. Prince made
$143,000.
This means that the superintendent that year made 7.6
times more
than the lowest paid ed tech ones for that school year.
I understand that superintendents and other administrators work many more hours
beyond the school day and into the summer, but do they really deserve to be
making over 7.5 times more than certain other staff
members?Other teachers are also losing their
jobs, as we all know. A lot of these teachers are newer teachers, and
for example of one teacher that might lose their job, a teacher with a
master's degree at step zero currently makes about
$53,000 a year. The superintendent made nearly three
times this salary last school year.
I find it unacceptable and disrespectful to have had administrators start
this process at a meeting, I think two meetings ago,
at least start that meeting and the outline of the plan where they
consider starting
to potentially close an elementary school, starting that process
by suggesting to close an entire elementary school before it was
mentioned to the public that there were any considerations made that
would involve cutting administrative positions or administrative salaries.
Communication about this entire process in general has felt subpar to me.
The slides for today's meeting were just posted on Friday, revealing the change of
course by the administration to suggest closing Kayler instead of
Dyer.
I can only imagine how students and staff at Kayler are currently feeling with the
sudden change of plans. This doesn't leave time for input from staff
or students, but I personally don't feel like the interests of
staff and students have been taken to account much at all during this
entire process. Thank you.
Thank you.
My name's Brian Green. I'm a father of four living in South Portland.
I want to thank the district and board for having us here tonight, and I want to
thank the teachers and staff of the district for taking care of our kids amidst the
present budget chaos. My comment tonight is in favor of maintaining the
full grade band model for elementary schools.
I'm requesting the district and board take more time to consider the implications
of restructuring elementary education.
Tuesday, September 1st, 2026, likely the first day of the
2026/27 school year, is now just 162 days away.
Only 84 days separate the June 9th school budget referendum and
that first day of school. According to the reconfiguration plan presented by the
district, in that time span, we would need to move at least every incoming
second grader from Kayler to a new school, move every incoming second grader
from Dyer to a new school, move every incoming second grader from Small to a new
school, reassign teachers, and redistribute classroom space in
every elementary school, rewrite the district's bus routes, reinstate
portables, and the list goes on. It's unrealistic to think that all of this can
be done in an orderly and efficient way in such a short period of time while
getting the competitive prices on materials and supplies, moving help, and the
rest. It's also unfair to parents to give them such a short runway to rearrange
their care plans, especially for parents with multiple kids who would be split
across different schools.
I also have a question to raise about the analysis of option A versus option B
presented here tonight, which is: How can any analysis of a change of this
magnitude not contain a single mention of environmental impact?
We are living in a climate emergency.
Our district sits at the edge of one of the fastest warming bodies of water on the
planet in the Gulf of Maine. The Gulf is warming faster than 99% of the
global oceans, thanks in part to man-made greenhouse gas emissions.
Warmer water increases the likelihood that we will see a deadly hurricane touch
down in Maine again in our lifetimes.
Smoke from forest fires, also directly correlated with the burning of fossil fuels,
has now become a regular part of our summer and fall, choking our kids while they
play outside and forcing us all indoors.
We are only beginning to see
what a world defined by adverse climate impacts will look like, and our children
will rightfully demand answers as to what we did about it.
Reconfiguration would lead to more car and bus travel for everyone in the district,
as it would move kids further away from their homes for longer stretches of their
academic careers. Since we're not all driving EVs and the district's buses
are still diesel,
this necessarily means more emissions in the scale of metric tons
of CO2 equivalent. It's not just that the district hasn't attempted to
quantify the additional emissions reconfiguration would create.
They haven't bothered to mention that there would be an environmental impact at
all. It's literally not on the list of factors being considered.
This is an abdication of our duty to the community, to each other, to the earth
itself.
30 seconds.
And it goes directly against South Portland's stated climate goals.
There's no way to move students across the distances reconfiguration requires
without burning fossil fuels. How can emissions in the environment not even be
listed as a consideration in this analysis?
We're asking everyone in the city to take the climate challenge seriously.
Why is the school district exempt from the same considerations?
Telling us that we already send buses across the district all day long isn't good
enough for parents who are concerned about our air and water, not to mention the
environment inside our unsupervised buses, which we'd be asking our kids to ride
for longer stretches of the day. I urge the district and board to demand-
30 seconds
... a fuller analysis of the options being presented,
one that takes seriously both the human costs of rushing our children through an
upheaval in less than six months, as well as the environmental cost of a plan that,
by its own silence, treats the climate crisis as someone else's problem.
Thank you for your consideration and your service to our community.
Thank you.
Good evening. My name is Kate Heard.
I'm a mom to a third grader at Kayler and a fourth grader at
Brown. I'm a South Portland homeowner, a taxpayer, and
former PTA president at Kayler. For the last 15 years, I've
evaluated homelessness programs and provided training and technical
assistance to city and state civil rights commissions throughout the
country. So I want to speak tonight not just as a parent, but as
someone who understands the long-term impact of policy decisions like
this. I'm here to stand up for the Kayler community.
I know our school community hasn't had a presence in past meetings, but it's
not because our families don't care.
Many of us first learned about the possible closure of our school through the news,
not from the district. That matters, because this process
isn't just about buildings and budgets.
It's about building trust. And right now, that trust has been
strained.I understand the district is facing real
financial pressure, but those pressures are the result of adult
decisions, and they should not fall disproportionately on one
group of children.
If Caylor is considered for closure, we deserve to understand
why. So my question is, what specific data,
criteria, and long-term analysis led to identifying Caylor as
a school to close beyond what was provided during the March 2nd meeting?
Where's the data from the physical plant analysis and reconfiguration tool?
At its core, this is about equity. I want to voice my support
for reconfiguring our schools and redrawing our school boundaries.
South Portland has said repeatedly that equity is a guiding value, but
today, our elementary schools are not providing equal opportunities.
I see this every day in my own home. My daughter at Brown has access to
programs like Girls on the Run and Civil Rights Team.
My daughter at Caylor does not. The gap is real, and it
matters.
If we're going to make a change of this magnitude, then it must be done in a way
that is equitable in both intent and impact.
This leads to my next question. Why is a less effective
and more segregated option being offered as a viable
solution for all South Portland students?
Redistricting done thoughtfully could be an opportunity to finally align resources,
balance enrollment, and ensure that every student, regardless of neighborhood, has
access to the same opportunities.
We have already seen in recent years what it looks like when forces
try to divide communities and turn neighbors against each
other. Here in Maine, we did the opposite.
30 seconds remaining.
We showed up for one another, and that school board, this school board, was a
part of that. So my hope is this, that you continue to stand on the side of
fairness and not on the side of decisions that risk deepening divisions within
this community. I'll close with this.
Our children are listening.
They hear these conversations, and soon they will be
classmates. What we decide here will shape not only their
education, but how they see each other.
I want my children and all of South Portland's children-
That's three minutes
... to walk into these classrooms with a sense of fairness, respect, and shared
opportunity.
Thank you very much.
Hi, my name is Mia Proctor. I have three children in the
Caylor
border area. They all attend there.
I have gone through three pre-Ks. I'm currently
in one right now, also at Caylor. My love is boundless,
or I have no bounds for my love for Caylor.
I didn't really want to come up here and have anything written because I
wanted to
see what everyone said this evening.
I can sit here and say
anything to you guys about how we all feel about our schools,
but we really need to recognize that Caylor
has a unique
BIPOC
community, just like Skillen. We have upwards of 30
different languages spoken. I do not see any of those parents here
this evening to speak to you.
And on their behalf, I would hope that you would consider when they
do get put into a different school next year if Caylor is to close,
where we will go. If we are the only
students to move into new schools, that has a huge impact on us,
and I would like for
all of you to consider how that will make each and every one of them
feel. Also, I would like to say save
music and theater.
Thank you, Mia.
Hi, my name is Amy Haskins. I have an eighth and a 10th grader in South
Portland. I'm speaking today specifically in support of the percussion
instructor position, and I have a few comments about the budget in general as
well. As many of you know and have heard tonight, this position was cut in
last year's budget proposal but was brought back due to resounding
community, parent, and student support.
Percussion is the foundation of a band, and this position supports band
students in grades five through 12, both at the middle and high school,
and is vital to the success of the entire band program.
It's misguided to try and cut it for the second time.
I know this is the superintendent's budget at this point, and I am very hopeful
that like last year, the percussion ed tech will be put back into the school
budget.
Percussion is complex and fundamental to a band, from snare drum
to mallets to timpani and so many more.
A single band director cannot simultaneously teach all of these instruments and
lead a whole band. From teaching the fundamentals to fifth graders
to advanced techniques and high-level support to those in high school, the
contributions of the percussion ed tech are irreplaceable.
And without this position, the entire band, the whole music program, will
suffer. I know that this year's budget is even tougher than
last year. There's no doubt that difficult decisions must be made.
I did notice that the district office leadership is proposing to cut a sum
total of zero principals or assistant principals while
eliminating an entire school. To me, this seems a little bit
like a shell game with no cut to the total number of building
administrators overall. With the goal of fiscal
responsibility and cost-cutting, it seems wrong to shuffle two building
admins to new positions while closing a school and firing dozens of
teachers. A position like the percussion instructor, a
student-facing ed tech position vital to the whole music department,
must be preserved. A full-time general music teacher was
permanently cut last year.
Please don't fall into the trap of continually cutting the arts.
This position is a tiny drop in the bucket of the budget and is integral to so many
band students and the entire middle and high school music program
I'll close by highlighting that South Portland has an award-winning band
program that the entire city can be proud of, including their presence
at two city parades each year and opportunities in concert
band, jazz band, marching band, and many band festivals and
competitions. This success is due to incredible music
educators, a team effort, and the percussion instructor is a vital and
indispensable part of that team. Thank you.
Thank you, Amy.
Kathy Mills.
I am the fundraising chair for the South Portland Music Boosters.
I'm an alum, I'm a parent, I'm many things.
Change is really hard, and it's undeniably hard.
And it may not look or feel like what we're used to today,
but thoughtfully reconfiguring our elementary schools is an investment in doing
better for our students, our educators, and our community.
By using our current resources more wisely, reducing inefficiencies, and
strengthening learning environments, conditions are created to improve outcomes
and the greater equity for every child.
We had the opportunity to do this. This isn't the first time that this has been
talked about. The Boundaries and Configurations Committee put together
thoughtful recommendations that no one did anything with.
And so now we're in a position where we're forced to do something.
And that included cutting upwards of 70 positions, which
does not create equity or keep education accessible
to our students.
So
what I'm asking is that
while my opinion and the opinion of the
citizens of South Portland are incredibly important and vital, I am
asking you to thoughtfully use data
and your resources, which include the 70 positions you cut
and the current teachers and administrators that you have, because they have an
incredible knowledge base. They're in the trenches with our children daily,
and often see them more than we even get to at home,
to utilize their knowledge base,
and the data that you're using currently to make a mindful
decision in reconfiguration of the schools.
And the other piece I'd like to really talk about is
the ed tech position from the music
position is another example of how this is not creating
equity and accessibility for all our students.
You've heard a litany of people, and you're going to hear more people talk about
the importance of that, but that position sets this district apart.
It sets that apart for our students and creates
opportunities for our students, not just for the awards and the accolades, of which
there are hundreds,
but it creates an opportunity for every child, no matter
what background they are from, to be part
of something bigger than themselves. So thank you for your service.
30 seconds left.
And I'm asking that you be mindful moving forward. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Kathy.
Hi.
Alex Mills, lifelong resident of South Portland.
Went to school here, kindergarten all through high school.
I'm actually a percussionist, and I can speak to what Ms.
Fletcher and Scarano said about percussionists being very
different to teach than the rest of the band.
To quote our younger generation of my children, "We are built
different." So,
it does take some different type of instruction.
When I started in sixth grade in 1994, we
had the percussion instructor position.
Since then, over 31 years, there have been five people who held
that position.
Compare that to the finance directors, and their lifespan's way different.
The people who held that position have been esteemed musicians,
performing artists, and educators all in their own right.
I didn't take
personal lessons, drum lessons as a child.
All of my instruction was through the school, through this percussion instructor
position we're considering cutting.
What they were able to provide in concert band, in jazz
band, in marching band was so crucial throughout my own history.
It allowed me to actually get into Berklee School of Music.
And I didn't go. It's super expensive. I went to USM, also great.
But what they offer is being missed by
the budget and the position, and what it
says.
What the students said earlier was also spot on.
They do so much more than just teaching percussion in class, and we weren't allowed
to applaud, but I will applaud them.
And, I just think that this is something that why are we talking about this
again, right? This happened last year.
All these people, many of these people said the same exact thing.
And I also have the position of working with the high school marching
band. I've been teaching the percussion, the drum line in the marching band since
2007. So I can see the result that these
percussion instructors, what they do every day with our students,
what it creates and the type of musicians and performers and
overall people that they're able to
give us as a community. So, thank you.
Thank you very much, Alex.
My name is Beth Wilcox, and I am a
South Portland resident. I am a band booster, a grandmother
band booster, and I'm here tonight to read a statement
from our high school band director, Jacob Lamontagne.
He
is writing that he wants to address the proposed
elimination of the ed tech position, percussion
ed tech instructor at the middle school
and the high schoolWhile I understand the
budget challenges we face, I want to stress that
these positions are not optional, they're essential.
These roles are fundamental to the success of our 5
through 12 music program and are key to why South Portland's
music program is recognized as one of the
strongest in the state. Percussion is not simply
an add-on to the band program. It is a specialized
discipline that demands expert-focused instruction.
In a full ensemble rehearsal, I am responsible for the
entire band. However, percussion students
require individualized attention on their unique
technical skills, timing, musicianship, instrument
transitions, and the logistical challenges specific
to their section. Without this specialized instruction,
rehearsals become less effective and the growth
of the entire ensemble suffers. Moreover,
percussion is one of the most accessible and successful entry
points into music education, particularly for
students with unique needs. It offers multiple
avenues for participation, contribution, and
success. For many students who may not thrive with a
wind instrument, percussion is where they find their confidence,
purpose, and sense of belonging. When we invest
in percussion, we invest in access, engagement,
and student connection to the school.
The loss of dedicated percussion instruction would
also have significant long-term consequences for program
continuity across grades. What we build in
the middle school directly impacts what is possible at the high
school. Reducing percussion instruction now
will have repercussions for years-
30 seconds remaining
... affecting students' preparedness, retention, ensemble
quality, and the overall strength of the program.
I respectfully ask the board to reconsider the
elimination of these percussion positions.
Maintaining strong percussion instruction is not just
about performance, it's about providing access and
support and opportunity for a wide range of learners across
our district. Thank you.
Hi, I'm Stacy Morin. I'm a special education teacher at Skillen
and a parent of a seventh grader in chorus and a
10th grader in band.
This is so hard, sorry.
I did want to say a few things to start on the positive.
I wanted just to thank the board members that have been out visiting our
schools. I was in the midst of a morning meeting when,
I think it was Claire Holman and Daniel, came into my
classroom and just got a brief glimpse of what I'm doing in my
classroom. And I was just hopefully here to say, and I hope they noticed that the
students in a developmental classroom were participating in a morning meeting
like any other elementary classroom, with a little extra support from the ed
techs and the special education team that comes
into my room.
And they even got a special greeting from one of my kindergarten students.
So I know it was quite nice just to see that they were present in our school
visiting, and that my students were able to meet some other people.
I also wanted to thank Rosemarie, who was also at our math and literacy night for
our families recently.
She stopped by to chat and we were talking about the school and teaching, and she
also got to see me welcoming other families into my classroom.
Again,
my families and my school got a moment to access differential instruction that's
going on in my classroom on math and literacy nights.
So I opened my doors and it was great.
Kids were like, "Oh, this is my other friend's classroom." And they got to see what
I do in my class on that evening.
So thank you for being out and about in our schools.
I want to say, as I've been sitting here, I've been typing things.
Sarah Maxwell, thank you for standing up and saying such great things about our
district and our schools. I too agree that I have changed my
role as a special education teacher many times over my 18 years
here at South Portland. I can do it again.
But I just need to know that we do have a good plan for special education
students. My hope is that we are making sure that we look beyond just
enrollment. In my world, of my 10 students,
it would be a great way of world if we were a well-staffed
classroom. It would be a teacher, me, with six to seven
full-time trained staff to ensure direct instruction,
safety and self-care and other
things are being addressed in that room.
Along with allowing special education teachers to remain in compliance with special
education paperwork, which we've talked a little bit about here, and the
documentation that we are required to do and all the meetings that we do
attend.
I also wanted to speak on behalf of the music
department. I am also concerned about the cut to the percussion ed
tech position.
Just really to make that connection.
I see what he does for the band when I'm there.
My daughter in chorus, those performances are enhanced by his
performance on the stage when he adds percussion to their performances.
And knowing even more about him, that he's a special education teacher, brings it
more near and dear to my heart. That is one area that many of the students in my
world, I love seeing that as they've moved on from me, they get to
access and participate in the music and chorus.
I had a parent come and cry when their child was on the stage, and they
found me, and I found them, and they were like, "Look, he's on the stage." So
one thing that music and band-
30 seconds remaining
... is it's a great equalizer for some kids that can't always participate in
sports. The music and chorus is an amazing place for them to thrive.
Thank you.
Thank you, Stacy.
Hello. Am I close enough?
My name is Rachel Gibbs. I'm a South Portland resident, a small school
graduate, and a speech language pathologist at Dyer Elementary School.
Thank you to the board for your dedicated time and effort in weighing this
very, very, very difficult decision.
What I want to talk about tonight is the recommended elimination of two
elementary-level occupational therapist positions.
I could speak at length about the care, patience, holistic
thinking, and specialized expertise that these occupational therapists
bring. But instead, I want to be clear about two consequences that these
cuts will have. They will increase costs and directly jeopardize
student safety.
For the financial implications, these cuts may appear to save money at face
value, but they don't eliminate costs. They delay and increase them.
Much of the rationale provided for our current budget crisis points to declining
enrollment numbers, specifically a decline in overall student enrollment
and multilingual learners. However, there is one critical
area that is consistently experiencing growth, our special
education student population.
As a speech language pathologist at Dyer, I work closely with our functional life
skills population.
In my five years in the district, Dyer has grown from one FLS classroom to
two, and these programs are expanding across the district.
The number and complexity of students with significant needs is increasing,
not decreasing.
We are not reducing need. We are removing the staff who meet it.
The district currently struggles to fill critical positions for our students who
require the highest level of support.
For at least the past five years, special education ed tech roles have been
posted but remain vacant, proving an inability to
secure this specialized support.
In an attempt to creatively address the staffing crisis
four years ago, the district hired two occupational
therapists in lieu of hiring four special education ed techs.
These OTs are currently embedded within two of the district's FLS
programs and are filling a longstanding staffing gap.
These OTs are not extra. They are filling vacancies that still
exist today. If these positions are cut, the gap doesn't
disappear. It widens immediately.
The district will need to hire at least four special education ed techs positions
that it has not been able to fill for years.
As of today, these roles are still posted and unfilled.
They've been posted all year long.
So what's the plan? Does the district have-
30 seconds left
... plans to suddenly fill roles that have been vacant for years?
What's the long-term strategy?
Hi, Caitlin Lefever, Dyer Elementary. I yield my time to Rachel.
At the same time, our responsibilities are expanding.
By September 2026, the district will serve four-year-olds on IEPs.
By FY28, that expands to three-year-olds.
The state of Maine also requires special education services through age
22 or a high school diploma.
So this means that by FY28, the district will be
responsible for special education students ages three to 22.
We cannot cut our way out of legally mandated services.
If the district cannot provide required services in-house, it will
be forced to contract out at a significantly higher cost.
Cutting providers now means paying more later to catch up.
Are we prepared to spend more on inconsistent contracted services
or to operate understaffed while costs continue to rise?
Have we considered maximizing the way related service providers can bill for
Medicaid?
Eliminating OTs or really any special education providers runs
directly counter to our district's growing legal mandates.
I also want to address student safety.
I have some pretty serious safety concerns for the future of special education
within South Portland.
I fear that the needs of our special education students are not being considered in
these budgeting decisions.
At Dyer, students with the most significant, complex, and often most
vulnerable needs are placed in our functional life skills programs.
The primary role of OTs in these programs is to work on foundational
life skills, specifically sensory and emotional regulation.
A dysregulated student is not able to access
learning and presents an increased safety risk to themselves, to their
peers, and the staff around them.
Eliminating these positions has immense implications for the
future safety and well-being of our students with the highest
needs. OTs are not a support we can scale back.
They are a safety layer we cannot remove.
And if our students are not able to be regulated and supported in
our own public schools,
the alternative is placing students in special purpose private schools.
This will be financially devastating for the district.
From my calculations from the Maine Department of Education, the minimum
cost for just one student at Margaret Murphy, where some of our students attend,
is over $38,000 annually, and that doesn't even
include charges for related services.
When we remove in-district support, we don't reduce need.
We export it at a much higher cost. This is not a
savings plan. It is a plan to spend more and support less.
I urge the board to consider the essential role that these occupational
therapists play, the staffing gaps they currently fill-
Rachel
... and the direct impact their presence has on student safety and
the district's financial stability. Thank you.
Thank you, Rachel.
Hi, my name is Cara Kralik. I am a seventh and eighth grade English to
speakers of other languages teacher, and also a
seventh and eighth grade SPTA rep at the middle school.
I am speaking today in favor of reconfiguring the elementary
schools. I think a lot of people have already spoken
to the way that this aligns with our equity goals,
and we also have seen that it's the most financially
efficient model. And,
you could look really quickly at those slides and see the list of positives for
option A was much longer than
the list for option B.
I also agree with others who have spoken, saying that I'm concerned
that if we don't do the reconfiguration now, it is just being
pushed farther down the road and will lead to more transitions for staff and
families, and students.
I think a lot of the conversation around elementary school
changes, obviously they are hard changes and there's been a lot of
focus on negatives. But from the experience of integrating the middle schools,
which I do see as an integration project,
I started at Memorial and have been at
SPMS since it was built.
I think it also offers a lot of opportunities.
There's increased opportunities for after-school programming for students.
Also, even though we love all our elementary schools, we know that some schools
aren't always the right fit for that student.
And so it gives students more opportunities to be in a community that feels right
for them and have different options.
If maybe one of the schools doesn't feel right, they get another
chance.
And,
I know that we have a lot of community members who love the
ability for their kids to walk to school.
That would still be there, hopefully, for a few years of their child's
school career. And I think it's also really important to keep in mind that there
are many students in the district who never are even close to having that option
or opportunity that we have to think about as well.
And then I want to close by talking about,
I've heard a lot of comments about the rush, or this is moving too fast, or we need
to take more time to think about reconfiguration.
And while I do think that we need to be intentional, I think that
it is possible.
We have had a reconfiguration committee over the past two years that
has collected a lot of data.
And I,
as an ESOL teacher, personally saw that this community can move
fast to support equity and support this community when push
comes to shove.
Many people in this room-
30 seconds
... within hours-- Could someone give me more time?
Many people within hours were-
I'm Chris Tarling, I yield my time.
Thank you.
Were creating mutual aid systems.
Within days, that was getting improved.
People were using their skills to set up
encrypted
technology stuff that I don't understand to make sure that the people engaging that
were safe. People were getting groceries to families, getting them rides,
getting children to school.
And so I know that this community can act quickly and has those
values, and I'm asking the board to live up to them,
not just when there's a crisis and you get to feel like a hero
because you drove a child of color to school, but in your everyday decisions.
And I would also really encourage, I don't live in South Portland, I would really
encourage voters who are here, who are listening to this, to keep that in
mind if the board approves
or goes forward with plan A, when it comes time to vote, and also to
encourage your neighbors and community members to vote for that as well. Thank you.
Hi.
Whoa, that was close.
Okay.
Good evening.
My name is Connie DeSanto. I live in South Portland.
I work in our school district, and I am president of our support staff
union,
which as of tonight, still represents 158 positions.
While many of you are used to hearing me speak, tonight I am going to
mostly speak from a perspective I do not often take at this podium,
the parent's perspective.
I graduated from this high school in the '90s.
My children are the fourth generation of my family to graduate from South
Portland schools.
I say that because when my grandmother graduated, it was not from this high
school, it was from Mahoney, which was the high school in
1942.
To say that we love this community and have given to this community is an
understatement.
My youngest child is currently a sophomore.
Saturday evening, I broke the news to him that the superintendent's budget
proposal has Kayler slated for closure.
His initial response was shock and disbelief.
Then he wondered where I would work.
I reassured him that I would still have a job in the district.
I just didn't know where yet.
A few hours passed and he said good night.
He paused to ask me where he would be able to do his senior
walk-through.
With his classmates,
of course, because there's still a lot of them.
And that question I didn't have an answer for, and that was hard,
really, really hard.
As a parent, I have been looking forward to that moment for literally years.
I have watched and cheered for other people's children, knowing I would have the
opportunity to do the same for my own.
Now I won't,
and that broke me a little bit, and I need you to know that.
Closing Kayler School has been presented to the public as a necessity
to preserve jobs.But with my parent hat on, I
want you to know that closing Cayler will have a real and lasting impact
on our community.
I want to talk about the impact of some of the choices about staff
cuts in the superintendent's proposal.
My family joined the Cayler community in 2014.
In 2015, a volunteer started at Cayler, who was the mother of a
classmate I had grown up with,
and she was volunteering because she had grandchildren at Cayler.
30 seconds, Connie.
That is how South Portland works, after all.
By 2019, I started working at Cayler, and this
volunteer was spending large amounts of her days there as well,
helping sort library books, laminating for classrooms,
making cutouts for pre-K, prepping materials for anyone that needed
it, and on and on. And then COVID hit.
This volunteer, though, she would not give up.
But volunteers weren't allowed anymore.
That's three minutes, Connie.
Barbara Chase, 20-year employee at Yield.
She wouldn't give up,
but the volunteers weren't allowed in our schools anymore,
so she was hired as a lunch aide.
But don't let that title fool you. Our lunch aide does a lot more than just
monitor the lunchroom.
At Cayler, we qualify for this grant for fresh fruits and veggie
snacks for all the students twice a week due to our socioeconomic
status of our student population.
Our lunch aide delivers the afternoon snack.
She also does other prep work and laminating and whatever else the
teachers, the front office clerk, or even our principal needs help with.
They can leave it for her, because if they don't, she'll come looking for it.
Her presence in the cafeteria also allows for teachers and staff to
have their contractual lunch break.
She's also a familiar, trusted presence.
Our lunch aide is a huge part of our community at Cayler, and the value
of the support she provides to students and staff in just two
hours each day is immeasurable. Which brings
me to this:
It's awfully hard for a parent like me to square how
cutting all of the lunch aides who work 10 hours per week
making the state minimum rate was a more
prudent budgetary decision than further reductions in
central office, administration, or director positions.
As an employee of the district and as union president,
I can say with confidence that our schools can function with fewer
administrators.
As a parent and a taxpayer in this city, it has been
deeply unnerving to see the lack of cuts to
administration, directors, and central office, where
salaries are significantly higher and their jobs do
not provide direct instruction to our students, while
reading that the values of the community were taken into
consideration.
Continuing to cut the lowest paid staff in the
district while we have redundancies in
administration is not the look we want for South
Portland, but unfortunately, it's the look we currently
have.
It needs to change.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Connie.
Hi, everybody, I'm Paul Bartlett.
I'm a grandfather of four South Portland students, and-
Could you turn that mic up towards your face, please?
Thank you
... grandfather of four students in South Portland system.
If you can just lean right into it. Yeah.
All right. How am I doing?
Thank you.
45-year homeowner in South Portland.
I'm not wealthy, but I've got a lot of wealth in my home, thanks in no
small part to a good school system.
That's why people want to live in South Portland. Thank you for your work.
Thank you for school staff. I'm sorry we're at this place.
Like I said, I'm not wealthy, and I'm only a sample size of one, but you can
ask me for more taxes. And I hope not just because
my daughter's sitting over there, the mother of the four.
But
I want to advocate for Option B. It feels like
the pace of this
is a little quick.
I
know we have capable staff. I'm skeptical about being
able to achieve all the goals, which are worthy goals.
I worked almost 50 years
in social services. I worked with disadvantaged populations.
I am very supportive of the idea of balancing out
diversity of your populations,
but I don't think you can rush it, and I think you need to get the broader
community on board.
This crisis feels new to the news
cycle, at least to this 74-year-old who probably pays
attention to different things. But as
a South Portland community, we got other stuff going on and other
competition for the tax dollars, and I think
maybe if you take the year,
you will maybe get broader buy-in,
broader support for the goals, and a better understanding to the
general population, not just the school population, not just the staff.
I just think you are better to take some time.
There's going to be disruptions.
Unfortunately,
some students are going to be
immediately disrupted. I feel badly for the
Cayler staff and communityBut for the rest of the
population and the school population, I say incremental
disruption, not immediate.
That's just my thought.
I guess I'd like to also ask my fellow South Portland citizens-
30 seconds left
... let's all get active at the state level.
Our governor, I love her, but she wants to give away the
surplus, as opposed to spending it on targeted needs.
South Portland's in a crisis. That emergency funds is for stuff like
this in other communities, and we can't be the only ones, so call your
legislators. Thank you.
Thank you, Paul.
Hi,
my name is Hailey Runback, and I have two children in elementary school.
When conversations started two years ago with boundaries and reconfigurations, I
was skeptical. I wanted to see evidence that reconfiguring and busing children
all over the city was the right solution to address equity.
But in the last few weeks, I've learned from a lot of eye-opening
conversations with administrators and board members, and I'm much more
open to reconfiguration, and I believe that there are many more parents like
me who could be an advocate for this process but want and
deserve to see a detailed plan.
I believe reconfiguration can be successful, but not if it's rushed, and not if
it's shoehorned into a budget. To do it right, we can't just have two schools on
the east side of town and two on the west.
That would only fuel division and higher inequities.
We should also have supports to help multilingual siblings who might be split up
into different elementary schools.
We need to be thoughtful about mitigating extra transitions for the smallest
children.
We need answers on busing times and academic metrics, and none of these is best
solved in an already painful budget year.
With the closure of Cayler, there are 160 students who are already
guaranteed to attend a new school next year.
Under reconfiguration, there would be at least 424 additional
students who'd go to a new school next year.
At this moment, with so many unknowns, it seems
unwise to experimentally disrupt 580-plus
students. Do we really think that this year, with 70 positions
expected to be cut, is the right year to uproot at least
580 students into new schools?
The reconfiguration decision seems to be unnecessarily rushed, particularly since
it's no longer about cost savings.
This year, reconfiguration first serviced publicly 46 days ago
at the in-person and virtual forums that were held in early February.
On February 12th, as soon as the online budget platform opened for questions,
I submitted several. They still haven't been answered.
As of today, just 10 out of 127 total questions have been
answered. These are not the actions that build community trust or
confidence in relocating 580-plus students
that that can be executed well in just five months.
I've heard from board members who feel that
the reconfiguration decision is now or never.
To me, that's a false choice, and the past failures to build
consensus or follow through shouldn't tie your hands.
You can convene a task force with stakeholders. You can set deadlines.
You can bring parents along to better consensus.
You can consult with experts to tell us how best to achieve equity.
You can do this better. I'm deeply sad for the students and parents
who face closure. I don't believe enough-
Seconds
... parents know, even today, that this is happening.
But as an active PTA parent at Small, I would love to welcome as many children as
we can possibly hold, and I believe that this could absolutely be the first
meaningful step in addressing the undeniable and fundamental equity issues
that exist in our schools. I believe South Portland does have the will to
reconfigure, but so far, the devil is in the unknown details.
I would urge you to let the dust settle on displacing 160 students
and take the time-
Three minutes
... to get the solution right. Thank you.
Thank you, Hailey.
Hi, my name is Meredith Diamond. I'm a mom of four, a 25-year
Maine educator and school administrator, and a South
Portland taxpayer
who is still trying to get my head around the fact that we,
with the highest per pupil expenditure in the state for large schools, are
making cuts of this degree.
We don't have community-wide feedback on the school closure
proposal to consider tonight, so instead, I'm going to share one
insight from the leadership profile that was developed by the firm conducting the
superintendent search.
This is based on the community listening sessions that they conducted.
In part of the needs analysis, they said, "Communication and
transparency issues are frequently raised, with participants
expressing frustration over a lack of clear, open
communication from district leadership.
There is a perception that decisions are often made in silos without adequate
stakeholder engagement or transparency.
Participants report a decline in communication quality, which has led to a
distrust and the sense of disconnect between the central office and the community.
Improved communication and transparency are critical to rebuilding
trust and fostering collaboration.
There is a call for more inclusive and transparent decision-making processes."
So my questions tonight are, at what point are we going to take transparency
seriously, and at what point do we commit to building
trust?
So I have a few ideas. Number one,
seed trust with transparency. Hold a public forum to
clearly explain to stakeholders the unauthorized
overspending and financial mismanagement reported in recent
audits that have drained the fund balance and created this
crisis.
Take responsibility in a way that helps us believe we
won't be in the same situation year after year.
Number two, open the door to the superintendent search process.
Abandon the plan shared at the last meeting to have interviews and
deliberations involve the board only, which is the most
un-Maine thing that I have heard from this board so far.And
demonstrate a true commitment to equity by creating
space for diverse voices to be a meaningful part
of this critical decision.
Number three, commit to convening a strategic plan development
committee made up of representative stakeholders from across the
district as soon as the new superintendent is identified.
Commit to developing a plan that is
aspirational rather than reactive, which
synthesizes our goals for equity with the
expertise of our educators and the deep and tireless
commitment of these families.
A plan that protects learning in our schools from
administrative and board member turnover.
We can't trust this feeling of being perpetually vulnerable.
Show us that we can trust you.
Collaborate with us. It's the only good way forward.
It's 30 seconds.
Thank you.
My name is Bill Newton. I'm a parent of a Skillen kindergartner and a two-year-old
who will someday be in the school system.
So my family will feel both the immediate and long-term impacts of any changes in
the district. In my day-to-day life, I deal with financial information and
reporting, so I have a bias towards great explanations for changes in numbers.
I've both created and reviewed the financial side of these types of
presentations and learned that often what is omitted can say as much as
what is presented. We no longer see the 8.4 million in
reductions needed from the roll-forward budget and how these cuts relate to that
number. Based on the information I've seen, it seems like the
initial under-explained 8.4 million was presented to be
scary rather than based on anything substantive, and the cuts seem to
disproportionately affect teachers and staff.
Over the last couple of weeks, I had the opportunity to watch and listen to last
year's budget meetings. My primary takeaway from those meetings is the board
was very whimsical with people's jobs and had no sense of long-term planning.
I saw an assistant principal position get eliminated and then reinstated two hours
later. I saw a director of mental health role be eliminated seven months after
creating it. After seeing all of this, I would not want to work in the school
district. Part of retaining and attracting talented people
is an underlying sense of stability.
Another choice the board has been making is to hide the real ongoing cost of
running the district by using $5 million of reserve funds over the last
four years for operating costs rather than emergencies or other significant
one-time costs. This has left the district without any reserve fund balance for
its intended uses and a fiscal cliff to overcome.
What would I suggest? I suggest the board determine the appropriate way to maintain
the status quo, meaning no building closure and reconfiguration
for FY27 while approving consultation with experts
on closure and reconfiguration over the next few months to make the right plan for
fiscal year 28. If the decision is made to close a school, I
support reconfiguring at the same time so we don't have to reorganize twice.
The current timeline is tight, and I'm glad time and logistics is listed as a risk
for a reconfiguration plan. I've seen "just do it" turn large-scale
projects into a disaster more than once.
Locally, CMP rushed to implement a billing system to meet an artificial
deadline, and their reputation still has not recovered 10 years
later. As a parent, I am happy to have my child be in a bigger
classroom to support equity and academic outcomes.
I'm happy to have my child get on a bus to go to school to support improved
equity and academic outcomes. My only wish is we give such a large
decision the proper time to be planned and executed to achieve the desired
result. I appreciate this is a very difficult position for everyone to be
in, and the result of any decision will have deep impacts on the community.
So I thank you for all the work and consideration going into these decisions.
And please save the percussion ed tech position. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Good evening. Thank you for listening. My name is Kelly Bertino.
I'm the kitchen manager at Small School, and I have two children at Brown
School. And I'd like to talk about my son.
He's six years old and is in kindergarten.
And
by the time he finishes his elementary school education, he will have gone to
Kahler. If you reconfigure, he will have gone to Kahler,
Brown, Small or Dyer, and then back to Brown.
That's quite a few transitions. I'd also like to remind you that he's a
COVID baby, and COVID babies did not have access to early
intervention. It's my understanding that 80% of matriculating
kindergartners last year came in with IEPs.
Mm-hmm.
And so
I
just want to drive home the fact that these are the children that will be
most affected by
a reconfiguration
in this quick of a manner,
the kids who came in already at a disadvantage.
So I guess
I want to say I'm not altogether opposed to
reconfiguration, but I'd love to see everybody pump the brakes.
I think that you've just cut 70 positions, and
you've closed a school, and there's a possibility you're violating union
contracts. And we don't have a bus plan.
We don't have a before and aftercare plan.
There's a lot that still needs to be
discussed. While I still have time, I'd like to remind everybody, because
it's such a divisive attitude in the city right now, that it
was school boards and city councils of the past that put us in this position.
You can't close all the schools on the west side of town and not
prioritize low-income housing on the east side of town and then expect everything
to be equitable. And I think it's a real shame that we're the
ones that are taking the brunt of this again, and our children, and we're having
to watch helplessly
while they're put through this instead of having the elementary school
futures that we planned for them. So again, please
consider how young these kids are that we're going to uproot and
Please consider the circumstances under which they entered elementary school.
Thanks.
Thank you, Kelly, and I really appreciate the way you clap.
I really like that.
Thank you.
Hold on. I'm setting my timer so I stay on time.
My name is Dr. Caitlin K. Foley. I'm a resident and a parent.
I am an expert on physical activity across the lifespan.
I'm a scientist and a researcher. I want to make an informed hypothesis, gather
pilot data, then study data, analyze it, and then make a
conclusion. Not jump to an untested solution.
The current proposals seem to be missing the critical step of pilot data, meaning
like, how is this actually going to work?
Have we done a small-scale test?
I wonder if it'd be possible to propose a hybrid pilot year of the two proposed
elementary options. Saturday night, I emailed this to board members
Richardson, Dowling, and Holman.
I live in District 5, so Dowling and Richardson, and Holman being the
at-large reps, I'm still waiting for your response email.
What if Skillen remained K through 4, being the
only one on the west side, Kayler closed, and the children on the west
side joined Skillen? It's always seemed a little silly to me that children
who live in Cash Corner or adjacent to Route 1 have been bused to Kayler but could
walk to Skillen.
What if children on Kayler's east side joined Dyer and Brown, but they do
it in a pre-K/1 and 2-4 system, such as Dyer and Small do
pre-K/1 and Brown do 2 to 4?
I ran this idea through ChatGPT and OpenAI.
I have limited time.
I asked to gather all relevant information and run multiple configurations.
The output I just proposed would maintain the best walkability for our
youngest learners and would be sustainable in terms of physical school space
for at least five years, given steady or even increased enrollment across the
district. I'm a proponent of children having the ability to walk to school,
especially at younger ages. This improves the health of the whole community, the
parents who walk the children to school, the senior citizens who volunteer as our
crossing guards, and the community members who come out and walk and socialize
during, before, and after school hours.
I think when we revisit how a pilot year worked
and when we discuss the '27-'28 budget, we'll then have enough
information from our school teachers and our administrators on how they can give
true, impactful feedback about which system actually works best for South
Portland. We can compare and predict based on neighboring
districts, but none of them are South Portland.
Our youngest children are being asked to make the biggest change.
And maybe this intermediate step will help ease the transition and the final result
for everyone.
I understand this may seem like a harsh suggestion coming from a Skillen parent.
However, I think that this gives the school district the opportunity to gather more
data on how it works for our students and how our community can have
information on a pilot year.
30 seconds remaining.
So that means I'm going to close my laptop, and I'm going to say raise my
taxes.
Mm-hmm.
Raise my taxes. I'm sick of this Groundhog Day.
I don't want to come back next year, and then we're back in the hole on more debt
and more debt. The world's sad enough.
These are the kids that are not just going to grow up and make decisions for me and
for you, they are our future. Let us spend the money there.
Mm-hmm.
I'll be back next week, and I'll email you all my whole statement.
Thank you.
Okay.
A second tough act to follow. Good evening.
My name is Kate Normadin. I'm a South Portland resident, parent of two
at Skillen, and also the Skillen School PTA president.
I've been very engaged in this budget process, done the research, spoken at this
podium before, and listened to the deliberations of the board.
And before you vote, just want to put three things on the record,
not as opposition, but just questions for the board to
answer before making a decision of this magnitude.
And I first want to acknowledge something.
Childcare and transportation were arranged tonight,
and I want to recognize that because I stood at this podium and asked for that.
So it's great.
I'm sorry. Can you say that again? You asked for what?
To make the meetings more accessible for the community.
So transportation
and translation services are welcomed.
But would be doing a bit of a disservice if I didn't also say
all of these families deserved a seat much earlier during
deliberation, not now at what appeared to be the end,
although unclear if there is a vote happening tonight.
The full community this decision affects-
Mm.
... has not had a meaningful voice in shaping it.
So whatever you decide going forward, let's try to change
that. The research on successful school change is
unambiguous that sustained, accessible community
engagement is not optional. It's what separates reforms
that take hold-
Mm-hmm
... from reforms that fail.
My second concern or point is about the district's own guiding
principle. In the very first budget presentation, it
states that South Portland embraces the community school strategy as
the foundation for how to design our programs.
The community school, as I understand it, is built on stability,
sustained relationships, and deep community roots.
A reconfiguration that moves children away from their neighborhood schools
and asks families to rebuild trust with a new building in just five
months,
works directly against the conditions the model requires.
So before you vote, I would ask, how does this reconfiguration
strengthen our community school strategy rather than undermine it?
And I want to say something about Skillen itself specifically.
It's not a formal community school, but it is a neighborhood gathering
place for a side of the city that has fewer parks, fewer
public spaces, and less city investment.
And under the proposed reconfiguration-The
geographic divide, it doesn't
disappear. There are still east side schools, there are still west side
schools. There are just different grade bands on the doors.
And the demographic differences between our east side and our west
side reflect decisions made over decades in housing
policy,
in city investment, in where resources were directed-
10 seconds
... and where they weren't. I don't believe anyone in this room thinks that
reconfigure as completed by September can undo what took
generations to create.
The research on school configuration is clear that rushed implementation is a
primary predictor of failure. I'm not alone.
A survey sent on Friday captured the signatures of 243
South Portland residents urging the sports to pause the plan and convene a
working group of experts to form a way forward.
I am not opposed to change, just opposed to change made in haste. Thank you.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Gretchen Nelson, and I'm a South Portland resident and an
educator who is directly impacted by this reduction.
I understand these are difficult financial decisions.
However, I ask you to reconsider the elimination of the career and technical
education positions at the middle and high school level.
Our district's mission is that students will belong here and achieve anywhere.
This program is where many students find that belonging.
We cannot prepare students to achieve anywhere while reducing access
to modern career skills. While computer science courses do exist,
they are not required and access is already limited.
With only one high school teacher and none at the middle school, access will
drop further and many students will not have the opportunity to take these
courses and gain important skills.
I want to be clear, providing devices is not the same as teaching and learning
computer science. Using technology is not the same as understanding it,
and computer science teaches problem-solving, logic, and how to create,
not simply consume.
This is not just a staffing decision.
It is a decision about student access, equity, and future
readiness. Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Gretchen.
Hi.
Good evening. My name is Adam Tishak. I am a parent of two.
I have a first grader and an incoming kindergartner.
I want to start off by saying thank you.
I've reached out to the school and the board, and almost all of you have responded
to me and talked to me, and that's more than I expected coming into this process
for the first time. I also want to say that there was a
statement in the presentation that hit home to me.
That was, "Moving forward effectively requires a longer
view with decision-making, new policies,
stabilized leadership, and a commitment to continuous
adjustments as data evolves."
That hit really home because my concern isn't about values or the
long-term vision that we all have of having schools that mirror our
city. It's about whether the plan is ready.
And from what I've seen, I don't think it's ready.
I don't think it's ready in two areas.
One is inclusion, two is the logistics of how it happens.
Inclusion, this is my third public statement.
I've brought this up every time that we haven't been direct to the
community that a school might close.
Your child might be going to a different school.
The comms coming out of the school say, "There's a budget meeting."
Mm-hmm.
People aren't going to come to that unless they know the severity of it.
And we heard from multiple people tonight that they found out a week ago or
two weeks ago, but these talks have been happening since
mid-December about the budget and January about closures.
We could do better. We've lost trust.
We need to rebuild trust before we can have such a massive change.
Looking at the data on how this is going to play out is also
confusing to me on what the plan is, and that brings
uncertainty.
We see data about school sizes and school makeup, but
admittedly, the class sizes are estimates on an average, and they don't
account for the inherent variability that is going to
happen when either option A or option B occurs.
We also want the schools to mirror the city,
but reconfiguration doesn't seem like it's going to play out
that way when you look at the east-west geographies of how things are broken up.
You have Dyer and Small as the pre-K through one, and Brown and
Skillen as the two through four. If you want to optimize
for distance and time for busing or walking, you still
have the east-west divide. How are we going to create the routes and
transportations that facilitate the diversity that we're asking for as a
city? We don't have a plan, and the school has said that that plan will happen
after we've decided. But how can we decide if we don't-
30 seconds
... have that data to know what's going to happen?
Transportation hasn't been addressed in terms of the cost of transportation.
And I just want to say that my fear isn't reconfiguration.
There's a lot of compelling reasons to do it.
My fear is we aren't doing it with a plan.
And if we don't have a plan and we don't know what's going to happen, we're less
than five months away. And I am scared that it's going to fall on its face and
we'll be in a worse spot. We'll have schools that still don't mirror our
city. We'll have students who are going through-
Three minutes
... a massive amount of change, and we're going to be back
in a crisis fiscally in the next year.
Thank you, Adam.
Hello. My name is Nicholas Boggs. I'm a
resident. I have a child in the school district, and I'm an
ed tech at Dyer Elementary.
What I came up to talk about was the one
position of the regular ed behavioral
strategist that is being cut. And then when you look at that
right next to it, it says that there is nobody else.
So
we're going to be increasing classroom sizes.
I can only predict that behaviors are going to also maybe go up
just a little bit.
And who is going to be handling
those plans? Is it going to be the regular ed
teacher in the room?
That's just one of my concerns. I would also like to
know what is that person's caseload, and then
how is that all going to get
placed on everybody else when that person's no longer
here? Also,
I want to apologize to our poor percussion ed tech
who year after year after year
just gets put on the chopping block.
They deserve to have some stability
in their life, and the
job that they do for all of the students is just
tremendous, and
I'm so sorry to that person.
And then my last question is what is our
plan when our population goes up?
Because I'm an optimist, and I believe it's going to go
up. So what's our plan?
After we close one school,
where do they fit?
Thank you.
Thank you, Nicholas.
Good evening, members of the school board,
administrators,
educators, and fellow community members.
My name is Peter Wetzel.
My family and I live on Oak Street.
Our son is a recent graduate of South Portland High School,
and our daughter is a junior here now.
In the 15-plus years we have lived in South Portland, we have grown a
great fondness for the sense of community that is fostered
here.
I felt called to join the South Portland teacher community after
COVID,
when teachers bravely returned to school to teach in person but
were required to take leave in the event of confirmed or even
possible illness.
The teachers sacrificed and suffered,
our children suffered, and I could not stand idly by.
So I began as a substitute teacher and
quickly realized teaching was a calling.
At the opening of the new South Portland Middle School, I was offered the position
of computer science teacher,
and while I was terrified at the unknown,
I embraced that opportunity.
Mm.
I have taken courses year-round alongside full-time
teaching to work towards certification,
and I have dedicated myself to building a middle school computer
science curriculum from scratch.
Now, three years later, I am at risk of saying farewell to this
position,
and the school is saying farewell to a curriculum pathway
that represents real 21st-century skill building.
Our community is at risk of becoming a cliché.
Gutting classes and letting go of teachers is the type of fix that will have
lasting ramifications.
And these people aren't just teachers,
they're coaches,
and after-school club advisors, volunteers, and
mentors.
Today, they are not proposed numbers anymore,
they are people.
What happened?
As a South Portland community member, I want to know where did we go so
wrong that we are in this position
again?
How and when will we know how we got here?
What processes are in place to ensure we won't be back in the same-
30 seconds remaining
... position again next year?
As you move forward
and hear from other community members and colleagues of mine, please know
we understand this is not an easy or simple decision.
You have a difficult choice to make.
Is the choice in front of you right now
the right one?
Thank you.
Thank you, Peter.
My name is Ishmael Daniels
at Cayler Elementary.
I don't have a speech, I just have questions.
Mostly to the board members here to the left, because I was hoping to hear some of
you ask these questions.
One, has the decision already been made through the budget
association? I believe her name is Dr.
Prince.
Did she already have a decision made coming into these
meetings with the pressure from the outside community?
My second question,
I noticed that the principal, Conley, from Skillen,
was on the financial board for making the decision
as to where the money would be going.
Being a principal, doesn't she have skin in the game, and wouldn't that be a
conflict of interest? Again, just a question.
Also, when you guys are making a decision as the board members, are you taking
into account what's going to happen to the kids?
I'm sure you can figure out where the money should go, how we're going to feed
them, how we're going to staff them, how we're going to educate them.
But when you take these kids and you put them into another school, second, third
grade, think about when you were in second grade and you were just figuring out
smelling yourself. You were figuring out what you were and how you were.
So going to a new school, getting new peers, getting new
classmates, how is that going to affect them in their
education?
Mm-hmm.
They learn social economics from their peers.
They learn family from their parents.
Please take that into account when you make that decision going to closing or
not closing a school.
I'm not here to tell you what to do.
All I'm saying is take the kids into account.
Make sure you're thinking about the children, not the money.Because
our kids are going to be affected. The behavioral problems
are going to be on your hands and then on our hands,
and then we're going to come back and have more conversations.
My last question:
are your votes public?
This meeting is public.
Are your votes, when you decide, public?
Do we get to see who voted for closure?
Do we get to see who voted for reconfiguration?
And do we get to make sure
that if we have questions, we can come back and ask you why you decided what you
decided? Thank you for your time. Thank you for everybody who participated.
Thank you for everybody who put this together. We've been here all day.
I appreciate you all.
Thank you very much.
Hi, Jessica Crowley. I have three
boys spanning from second grade to seventh grade right now.
I just, having heard everything tonight and what
everyone's sharing,
having been to some of those very early budget meetings
in February,
and the end of January, just want to first hold space for the
great loss that we are all experiencing
through this budget
challenge. I think
we all know that it's a loss for our community, it's a loss for our staff,
it's a loss for our students, both now
from positions that are cut, but also in the future, because you
can't attract the greatest teachers in a district that cuts
70 to 80 teachers in one fell swoop.
And you're only as good as the people that are connecting with your students every
day. And I know we're in a tricky situation and I don't have easy
answers, but I think
it's important to hold space for that while we also look to the future.
So while we're holding space for that, I want to thank the board and
ask the board to, at the same time,
make real space for long-term goals,
make real space for increased transparency.
At those first budget meetings, I went because I was
an engaged parent, and that's when I found out about a $7 to $8
million deficit. And the pie chart had
rearranged elementaries and then a question mark for $5
million. That was the pie chart. And I was like, "What?
It's January. What's happening?" Right?
Please make space for community input and for rebuilding
with a vision that's going to lift
us and especially our children, our teachers, our
students, our staff, and therefore also our wider community, our
state, and beyond. So thank you for the work that you're doing,
and just try to hold space for both because they're both
important. Thank you.
Thank you, Jessica.
Hi, Lauren.
Lauren Shapiro, Deak Street.
It's unfortunate we've reached a point where all options are difficult,
largely because this process has moved so quickly.
Earlier, I urged the board to consider reopening discussions with
associations as there could have been an opportunity to preserve
jobs.
I fully respect the collective bargaining process and the contracts in
place. At the same time, it was worth exploring whether
staff would be open to adjustments if it meant avoiding layoffs.
At a moment when jobs were on the line, it's fair to ask:
where were the associations in exploring solutions?
Why wasn't there a more visible effort to come to the table and consider
options that might have helped save livelihoods?
At the end of the day, everyone is working toward the same goal:
supporting students, protecting staff, and strengthening our
schools. Leadership and associations should be
on the same team here,
looking for solutions together rather than letting opportunities slip
away.
I want to call out very real inequity that exists in our community.
Industrial concentrations have shaped housing,
property values, and environmental conditions, placing an
unequal burden on certain neighborhoods.
These realities must be acknowledged and addressed in future planning and
policy decisions to protect health, expand
opportunities, and help bridge inequities in the school
system. As we know, inequity starts with housing,
and addressing it at the root is essential to creating lasting
fairness and opportunity for all children and families.
It's critical to note that the tank farms, which sprawl across our
city and infiltrate our neighborhoods, have been
systematically undervalued for decades.
While residents have faced continual and substantial increases in
property values, the tank farms have never,
and continue to avoid their fair share of contribution to the
rising costs of our city,
all while their emissions harm the health and wellbeing of our
residents.
Based on 2021 assessor's data,
even before the recent revaluation that further widens the gap,
tank values per acre were one seventh of residential,
and industrial warehouse one fifth of residential.
Why does the city and state continue to-
30 seconds remaining
... subsidize these parcels at the expense of our
community when we are in such dire need for funding our
city?
It is inequitable and unsustainable.
Fairly assessing these parcels would generate significant revenue
for our schools, supporting staff, programs, and
resources that benefit every child.
It's long overdue.Considering the city's
responsibility in shaping the inequities and disparities that exist-
Two minutes, Lauren
Oh.
Brianna Bailey, resident. I'll yield my time.
Thank you.
Considering the city's responsibility in shaping the inequities and disparities
that exist and continue to persist in our community, I
ask that they make good on their part in this narrative.
The city should be obligated to pull from their fund balance to
support another year for all five elementary schools to stay
open. This buys us at least a year to do this right.
Gaining community buy-in and thoughtful execution, it's the right
thing to do. Thank you.
Thank you, Lauren.
Hi there. My name's Julia Edwards. I live on Dawson Street.
I've got a kiddo at Skillen,
and one at a private pre-K,
who will
hopefully go somewhere. We don't know where.
But
I wasn't planning on speaking tonight because so much of what
that impressive line of people out the door said really hit home,
and I know I've communicated to
all of you
my thoughts. And for me, it comes down to just a fundamental gut check
of fairness.
None of these options are awesome.
It all stinks, and so when I look at
the choices that have to be made, because a choice does have to be made,
and I really appreciate that you seven are the ones to do it.
I wish the students could vote. But
I really appreciate the gravity of this.
And so for me, hearing that Kaylor, the second most
diverse and second most
economically disadvantaged part of our community, part of our city,
and the families there and the students there are going to have to bear the brunt
of this, that does not sit well with me at all.
And so if I could fix it
by saying, "I'll send my kid to the moon," I would, but that's
obviously not an option right now.
So I am not in favor of anything that puts this burden on this
one portion of our population. I can't look at my
friends and neighbors and my kiddos' friends and look them in the face
and say, "Yeah, that sucks. We did what we could," but
that's not all right. So we all have to have skin in the game or no one at
all, is how I feel about it at the end of the day.
When I talk to my kids about this, when they're old enough to understand, and they
ask, "Mom, what did you do?" Or, "What did you think?"
I'm hopefully going to be able to say,
"I advocated for what was the most fair."
Full stop.
Fairest from a lot of bad options. The other piece that
I'm hearing, all of the comments that I hear are so
amazing and uplifting and asking for these things of like, "We need
more time and more community." And I'm like, "Wow, wouldn't it be nice if we had
one school in our city, a unified elementary school, that
actually solved for virtually every
problem that has been enumerated tonight?" And I wonder where that could be.
Anyone have any ideas?
We literally have vacant space in the middle of the
city sitting unused that the city is deciding what to do
with multi-millions of dollars to give
themselves their own offices, which yeah, they need as
well, but why can't that be the vision?
Why can't we have a vision of putting a unified school there in, I don't know,
what'd we say, Jenny? Five years, 10 years? Let's do it.
Make it a goal. And then guess what?
You also have other buildings in the city that city services and
community centers and these things that we need to interconnect and really,
truly engage with each other could actually allow for
and could actually solve.
We could have city officials sprinkled throughout the city.
We could sell some of the buildings and build housing
in places that don't have the opportunity to have it because it's
already so full. There are very few places on the east side of town that have room
for housing. I know the idea about Mahoney being housing was
thrown out there.
Julia, that's three minutes.
That ship didn't get sailed. Can you give me some
time?
Jenny's giving me-
Okay, you got it. Okay.
Thank you.
Keep going.
Because I feel like-
You don't need to go, Jenny. Never mind.
Thank you. Yes.
It's okay.
On the record. Thank you.
Jenny Lupica. Neil Metat.
Thank you.
Because I feel like if this isn't said out loud, the idea will just die,
because
when this is said out loud about, "Well, what about Mahoney being a school?" And I
know the school board gave it back. I know that we don't own it anymore.
I get that. And I know that the state gave us money so that we could have a middle
school, and that we might have to get that money back.
But nobody has actually asked that question and given us an answer
as to if that's true. I highly doubt that the state is going to be like, "Oh, no,
you want to solve for equity and create more opportunity in your city?
Sorry, no, you can't do that." Are you kidding me?
I'd like to make them have that answer in public.
And so I'd like to have the conversation and really give it
some life and some breath instead of just constantly being told,
"No, that's not possible. No, we can't do that."
We're literally some of the most advanced beings in the
universe mentally, and you're telling me we can't do this?
We can do this. We can do anything we want.
We just have to say we want it and then do it.
So I guess
the idea that we are going to put limits on what's possible in
a system that we
didn't create it, but we are perpetuating it, and we are in control of its
future, especially when the stakes are so high as far as
our youngest citizens go. I don't accept that,
no, we can't, and we shouldn't, or it's too
expensive.You had people stand up here and say, "Raise my
taxes." So clearly, there's
an appetite for some kind of actual change.
And if we set the intention and people actually say it out loud,
"Hey, I really think that the city should have a unified elementary school in the
middle of the-
30 seconds, Julia
... in the middle of town
where the Mahoney site is, or find some other land.
But in the meantime, here's what we can do." That should be the first thing out of
everyone's mouth if we actually want to make something like this happen.
Otherwise, if we don't say it out loud, and they'll just continue to say, "Oh, it's
not possible," and then we've let them show that it's not possible. It's possible.
Nothing's a done deal until it's a done deal. So, and even then, it can be undone.
I'll explain why it's a done deal afterwards, but...
Thank you.
My name is Carolyn Nishan. I am a South Portland resident and parent,
and depending on the state of the lottery, we'll see
if my child gets into pre-K or
not.
I echo what Julia said. I look for the most
unifying option, the most
equitable option.
And on slide three there, it
stated what the South Portland School District's mission was, but
it's not actually the mission. "Belong here, achieve anywhere," if
you go to the website, that's the district theme.
The mission of South Portland School District, which
I hope all of you know by heart and shouldn't have to
look, is enriching lives through quality learning
for all.
I assume that's something that all of you could recite back to me, which
is why I found it surprising that this wasn't the actual mission
on this slide deck.
Quality learning for all,
to me, means that all students
have equal access to what is
offered by this district.
And when I hear that some schools
have such disparate opportunities offered to students
from others,
how can you stand by that being quality learning for
all? And so when I think about what was mentioned, that some
of these children were the COVID babies, and we're
then thinking about
potentially not having them shift once, but twice.
I am a strong supporter of if there has to be an option of
none of these are perfect options,
I would say the better one is option A,
to move forward and not impact these children
multiple times. One other point that wasn't mentioned,
many of the points that I wanted to mention were mentioned tonight.
So I'll just mention also,
the shift to reconfiguration, something I've learned is that that fourth
to fifth-grade shift is massive. These children go from
small classes to entering into the middle school, and they
enter into a grade where they're seeing tons and tons
of kids they have never seen before. This is extraordinarily overwhelming.
To start as soon as we can to move these classes
to larger
groups so that they can see their peers.
The sooner we can do this, the better.
I will close by putting on an entirely different hat.
I was the executive director of the Portland Symphony for 10 years and worked there
for 17 years. Please keep that percussion
ed tech position.
Music reaches people where they are.
It does not matter if they become a professional musician.
Set this district apart by keeping positions like that.
That is an incredible resource to have someone with those skills.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Carolyn.
Are there any other public comment?
Really?
No, faking it out.
Oh, oh.
Okay.
Morgan Kerr.
I wasn't going to really say anything tonight, and I just feel like
it needs to be said. As I'm listening to the
back and forth about option A or option B, the reality is it's
obviously I'm a Cayler parent.
With Cayler School possibly closing, it's those kids that are going to be the
yo-yo being pulled between whatever option we consider.
And it's going to be those kids that are going to be most negatively impacted.
So it's those kids that lose their community that they're in
right now.
They lose those systems of support.
And then to think that they might have to rebuild those
two
more times is just like, "Come on."
If the idea was to reconfigure
and
close a school,
then more time should've been put into the process of what school is
going to close and how that's going to happen, and not just put these
kids in limbo with what that's going to look like.
It's a disservice to them, it's a disservice to their
teachers and that incredible school community.
So yeah. That's all.
Thank you very much.
Any other comments?
Seeing none, public comment is closed.
I'm not going to have us go back to going through debate and
going into regular session and voting at 11:15.
Thank you.
So, yeah. So, we did have some
questions that were asked, and I want to see if
between the superintendent andAnd,
and, um, my record keeping that we can
find the questions and answer them as best as we
can tonight. So, the first question...
Did you write some questions down too?
I thought I did, yeah.
Okay.
I wrote a lot of stuff.
Um, the first question was, can we explain Title
VI and how it's not being violated?
And I know Title VI is the 1964 Civil Rights
Act. I don't know if anybody is prepared to speak to that,
or if we need to get a legal answer about that.
Do you-
Yes. I get the question. I don't have the answer.
Okay.
I did some quick research.
Well, I don't want some quick research. I want some legal answer.
So if somebody doesn't have that...
The second question is, what decision framework was
used to choose,
or what decision framework will be used to choose
option A or B?
I'll let you speak to that.
I was just going to suggest that perhaps, with time being so late, we
could just make sure that we've recorded the questions and come back.
Yep.
Folks, it's 11:15 at night. So the question-
Is that what people would prefer? It's really up to the public, because I said we
would answer the questions at the end.
So is that what-
We would like to hear answers.
Yeah.
We'd like to stay for your answers.
Okay. We'll do answers. So,
what
decision framework would be used to choose either A or B?
I don't know if you know that,
Dr. Entwistle or not.
I don't know that there is a...
Dr. Prince,
did you hear the question? You might have a-
Yeah. What decision framework would be used to choose between
options A and B?
I think that's essentially a board decision.
That's what I would say.
Okay.
Good answer.
And there were a couple
questions about
savings from eliminating professional development days,
and I have one answer to that. I don't know if you want to...
Like, why we can't do that, why we can't save money from professional
development days.
Well, professional development days are
paid days and part of the regular contract.
Thank you. That would've been the answer I would've given.
The teacher contract.
Right.
I have a couple
other questions that I had answered, but
there was a question, and somebody may be able to answer this,
was 80% of our last year's kindergarten class, did they come in
with IEPs? I didn't think that that was the answer.
No, that is an incorrect number.
I think it might've been 8-0 as opposed to 80%.
Maybe that's the number I remember.
I thought it was like 70.
What's that? If you are looking at the number of students, we
can bring the exact figure back, but it was not 80.
We have 23%-
That's what I thought
... of our students have-
Right
... special education.
Thank you.
There was another question about what...
You might as well just stay there, Joe because,
and I know you know the answer to this.
What is our plan if the population were to go up?
Sure. That is why we are not recommending a decommissioning of
this school, but rather a closure for right now, but we don't have evidence of
an expected increased population.
Thank you. And the next question is, has the decision been made about
Kaylor? No, because that's a board decision.
So that has not been made.
And
this question, they asked about Principal Connolly who helped make the
decision about how money was expended, and is that a conflict?
And I would say no, that's not, but I'll let you go ahead and speak
to that if you want to say more.
Nope. Our team of 25 leaders is involved in
the process of putting together the superintendent's budget, and we do
so as a team with the best interest of all of our students
during that process.
Thank you.
And
one question was, "If Kaylor closes, where are those kids going, and what does that
mean?" We don't have the answer to that at this point.
"Are your votes public?" All our votes are public.
They will happen right here in a public meeting, which is why they're not
going to happen tonight, because nobody can think straight at this point.
But they will be public, and you will be privy to them.
And
there was a question about where were associations in
offering solutions, and I have an answer to that too, but I know you do as
well.
Sure. Our associations have been great partners in this
process.
They have made it clear from the outside
of this process this year that they wanted to offer consultancy
where appropriate, and they've done a marvelous job
doing so.
Thank you. The last question was why Mahoney can't
work, and I'm going to answer that question myself because
first, we have decommissioned it.
We've turned the building back over to the city, so we would need to buy it back
from the city because it's owned by the city.
But more importantly,
because it was decommissioned, we would now need to meet all the
current regulations, which is why the plan for
turning it into City Hall is $190 million.
It would cost millions and millions and millions of dollars
to renovate that. And the reason that that building was not
chosen for the middle school is because there is not adequate parking on the
grounds. So those two primary reasons are reasons
why. Doesn't mean there isn't another site, but why that
site-Is not
viable for an elementary school. The other thing about an
elementary school is I think,
and I had a member of a caregiver ask
me about this,
and I think thinking about that in a long-range plan makes
sense. It's just not a solution that's going to happen like
in the next three years. It's more like a 10-year plan.
So yeah. But that's something we can look at.
It's just not going to solve the problem for today.
So,
we will continue this discussion. There are more questions.
There are comments from the board.
But
at next week's meeting, which is next Monday-
Yeah
... March 30th, at 6:00 o'clock-
Can we talk about meeting earlier, please, than that?
Sorry?
Can we collectively agree that we need-
Well, we can't collectively agree to
anything right now because-
Well, can we
out in the open say that waiting another week,
we can't do that?
I don't know that there's any other option for that, so we can-
But can we explore it? Can we be open to it?
Yeah.
Because I don't want to say, "See you next Monday" to this group after this
meeting.
The next scheduled meeting is Monday, March 30th.
That's the only meeting we have on the books.
If we get something more, it'll be published on the city website.
Okay?
So are we going to explore-
Motion to adjourn.
Can we explore the option to have more meetings this week?
I-
That's all I want. It's a question. That's all I'm asking for.
No. It's not up to me. But-
Well, it is up to you
... motion to adjourn.
Second.
Motion to adjourn.
Would you like to have a conversation with me?
Moved by Smith and seconded by Feller.
Yeah.
All those in favor?
Let's have another conversation, maybe tomorrow or something.
This meeting is adjourned.
Yeah. So do I.
Oh, Jesus.